raining?
'You mocking-birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb
You might behold, triumphing in their faces; 1440
Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain,
Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee:
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense;
'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife,
Yet save that labour, for I have them here.
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay. 1845
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife:
'Yet die I will not till my Collatine
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride 1720
With words, till action might become them better. 1375
With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid, 1265
With too much labour drowns for want of skill. 1150
With this, they all at once began to say, 1760
'With this, I did begin to start and cry; 1690
Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts,
With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty,
With sad attention long to hear her words.
With outward honesty, but yet defiled
With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;
With swelling ridges; and their ranks began 1490
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight:
With shining falchion in my chamber came
With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across,
With men's abuses: those proud lords, to blame, 1310
With head declined, and voice damm'd up with woe,
Will we find out; and there we will unfold
Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye;
'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
Who, wondering at him, did his words allow:
Will slay the other and be nurse to none.
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.
'Why should the private pleasure of some one
Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, 1275
'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity,
Why art thou thus attired in discontent?
Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping: 1140
'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees:
Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, 1510
Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;
Whose love of either to myself was nearer,
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest:
Who, mad that sorrow should his use control,
Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,
Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.'
Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood
Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die. 1190
While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill. 1185
Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth, 1725
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place:
Who being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows; 1170
While Collatine and his consorted lords 1660
While with a joyless smile she turns away
Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth
Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light,
Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice; 1460
Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.
Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,
Which the conceited painter drew so proud,
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black:
Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,
When with like semblance it is sympathized.
When the one pure, the other made divine? 1215
When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces.
Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,
Which being done with speedy diligence,
Where thou was wont to rest thy weary head;
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived? 1805
Where no excuse can give the fault amending: 1665
Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil.
Wherein deep policy did him disguise;
Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies. 1500
Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought,
When they had sworn to this advised doom, 1900
When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field,
When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion
When more is felt than one hath power to tell. 1340
When life is shamed, and death reproach's debtor.
When every part a part of woe doth bear.
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?
'When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee,
When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee.
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;
What should I say? One of my husband's men
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
'What is the quality of mine offence,
We will revenge the death of this true wife.'
What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.
'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know
We are their offspring, and they none of ours.
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind:
True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed
Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,
Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid, 1835
Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly
Upon his head that hath transgressed so;
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!
Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,
'Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
Unless thou couldst return to make amends?
Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.'
To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes,
To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow
To trembling clients be you mediators:
To those that live, and think no shame of me. 1255
True grief is fond and testy as a child, 1145
To wrong the wronger till he render right,
To wake the morn and sentinel the night,
To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light,
To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.
To think their dolour others have endured.
To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,
To tame the unicorn and lion wild,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel,
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,
To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.
'To show the beldam daughters of her daughter,
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate:
To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds! 1600
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;
To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours, 995
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,
To make him moan; but pity not his moans:
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, 1000
To plague a private sin in general? 1535
To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled,
To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow;
To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled 1595
To make the child a man, the man a child, 1005
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night:
To jump up higher seem'd, to mock the mind. 1465
To hide deceit, and give the harmless show
To give her so much grief and not a tongue.
To find a face where all distress is stell'd. 1495
'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
To endless date of never-ending woes?
To eat up errors by opinion bred,
To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs,
To cheque the tears in Collatinus' eyes.
To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,
To break upon the galled shore, and than
To blot old books and alter their contents,
To all sins past, and all that are to come,
To Tarquin's everlasting banishment.
To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran,
Time's ruin, beauty's wreck, and grim care's reign:
Time's office is to fine the hate of foes;
'Time's glory is to calm contending kings, 990
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur
Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, 1620
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,
Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here;
'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth be, 'arise:
This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,
Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire, 1655
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps, 1625
'Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity,
Those round clear pearls of his, that move thy pity,
Thou nursest all and murder'st all that are: 980
This picture she advisedly perused,
The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear: 1525
They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks.
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence;
They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee,
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.
Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky.
To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter
To talk in deeds, while others saucily 1400
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining: 1320
To see sad sights moves more than hear them told;
To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.
To make more vent for passage of her breath;
To live or die which of the twain were better, 1205
'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack, what were it,
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,
To imitate thee well, against my heart
To hide the truth of this false night's abuses:
To flatter thee with an infringed oath;
To find some desperate instrument of death:
To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.
To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds:
To clear this spot by death, at least I give
To chase injustice with revengeful arms:
To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!
To accessary yieldings, but still pure
'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life;
'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore; 1165
'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear: 1380
Till manly shame bids him possess his breath
Till life to death acquit my forced offence.
Till after many accents and delays, 1770
Till after a deep groan--'Tarquin from hence?'
Till Lucrece' father, that beholds her bleed,
Thy father die, and not thy father thee!
Thus cavils she with every thing she sees:
Through which I may convey this troubled soul.
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep:
Throng her inventions, which shall go before.
Threatening cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;
Thou wast not to this end from me derived.
Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse,
Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.'
'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,
This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth,
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill:
'This brief abridgement of my will I make:
This bastard graff shall never come to growth:
This Plot of death when sadly she had laid,
Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me 1735
They that lose half with greater patience bear it
The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow,
The weary time she cannot entertain,
The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds
The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust, 1435
The stain upon his silver down will stay.
The stained taste of violated troth; 1110
The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.
These water-galls in her dim element
These means, as frets upon an instrument,
These contraries such unity do hold,
The scalps of many, almost hid behind,
There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,
The repetition cannot make it less;
There might you see the labouring pioner
The remedy indeed to do me good
The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife;
The protestation stops. 'O, speak, ' quoth she,
The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,
The post attends, and she delivers it, 1385
The poison'd fountain clears itself again;
The painter was no god to lend her those;
The one will live, the other being dead:
The one doth call her his, the other his,
The old bees die, the young possess their hive: 1820
Then son and father weep with equal strife
Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:
Then let it not be call'd impiety, 1225
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow;
Then call them not the authors of their ill, 1295
'Then be this all the task it hath to say
The murderous knife, and, as it left the place,
'The more to blame my sluggard negligence: 1330
The more she thought he spied in her some blemish. 1410
The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
The moon being clouded presently is miss'd,
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing 1055
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill
The little birds that tune their morning's joy
The lechers in their deed: this act will be
Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing;
Their face their manners most expressly told:
The homely villain court'sies to her low; 1390
The heavy motion that it doth behold,
The grief away that stops his answer so: 1715
The father says 'She's mine.' 'O, mine she is,'
The face, that map which deep impression bears
The face of either cipher'd either's heart;
The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece' life,
The deep vexation of his inward soul 1830
'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire, 1060
The credulous old Priam after slew;
The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.'
'The baser is he, coming from a king,
The Romans plausibly did give consent 1905
That wounds my body so dishonoured.
That with my nails her beauty I may tear.
That was not forced; that never was inclined
That two red fires in both their faces blazed; 1405
That through their light joy seemed to appear, 1485
That thou art doting father of his fruit. 1115
That they will suffer these abominations,
That she with painted images hath spent;
That she her plaints a little while doth stay,
That she concludes the picture was belied.
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent:
That patience is quite beaten from her breast.
That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.
That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.
That no man could distinguish what he said.
That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes;
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate;
'That life was mine which thou hast here deprived.
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,
That jealousy itself could not mistrust
That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight: 1455
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, 1230
That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.'
That guides this hand to give this wound to me.'
That for Achilles' image stood his spear, 1475
That dying fear through all her body spread;
That cannot tread the way out readily;
That blushing red no guilty instance gave,
That blow did that it from the deep unrest
That I no more can see what once I was! 1815
Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion. 1210
Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.
Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill!
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill; 1050
Such sweet observance in this work was had,
Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell;
Such danger to resistance did belong,
Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds:
Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
Stood for the whole to be imagined.
Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew;
Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed,
Stone him with harden'd hearts harder than stones;
Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes,
Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems:
Speaking to those that came with Collatine, 1740
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, 1415
So with herself is she in mutiny,
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,
So should my shame still rest upon record,
So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred;
So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away. 1220
So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes.
Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords.
Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
Some present speed to come and visit me.
Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd,
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice;
Some happy mean to end a hapless life.
Some dark deep desert, seated from the way, 1195
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill:
So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.
So am I now: O no, that cannot be; 1100
So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter,
So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell
So, I commend me from our house in grief: 1360
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear,
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame, 1085
Since that my case is past the help of law.
Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.'
Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced,
Shows me a bare-boned death by time out-worn:
'Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead.
Show'd deep regard and smiling government.
Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining:
She would request to know your heaviness.' 1335
She would have said 'can lurk in such a look;'
She utters this, 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he,
She throws her eyes about the painting round, 1550
She throws forth Tarquin's name; 'He, he,' she says,
She thought he blush'd, as knowing Tarquin's lust,
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, 1615
She modestly prepares to let them know
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her: 1370
Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife:
She dares not thereof make discovery,
Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.
Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger
'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.'
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused; 1580
Sad souls are slain in merry company;
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.
Revealing day through every cranny spies,
Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,
Replies her husband: 'do not take away
Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;
Receives the scroll without or yea or no,
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely:
Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd
Poor women's faces are their own fault's books.
'Poor instrument,' quoth she,'without a sound, 1515
Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away,
'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree?
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day:
'Poor broken glass, I often did behold
Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so
Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage.
Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.
Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces;
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste,
'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools!
'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,
O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,
'O, that is gone for which I sought to live,
'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse!
Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.
Or one encompass'd with a winding maze,
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms. 1570
Or at the least this refuge let me find; 1705
'O,' quoth Lucretius,' I did give that life
'O, peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told,
Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, 1555
On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,
On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
Only to flatter fools and make them bold: 1610
One poor retiring minute in an age
One justly weeps; the other takes in hand
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; 1545
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild;
O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!
Of what she was no semblance did remain:
Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky,
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.
Of that polluted prison where it breathed:
Of that black blood a watery rigol goes,
Of spirit, Life, and bold audacity.
Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy:
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn,
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, 1575
Of present death, and shame that might ensue
Of physiognomy might one behold!
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears.
Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.
'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,
Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.
'Now, by the Capitol that we adore,
Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour,
Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.
Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe.
'Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state:
No rightful plea might plead for justice there: 1700
Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses;
Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.
No object but her passion's strength renews;
'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living, 1765
No more than wax shall be accounted evil
No man inveigh against the wither'd flower, 1305
No cause, but company, of her drops spilling:
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh
My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.'
My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,
My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath,
My soul and body to the skies and ground; 1250
My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say
My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born.
My shame be his that did my fame confound;
Myself was stirring ere the break of day,
Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,
My sable ground of sin I will not paint, 1125
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; 1175
My resolution, love, shall be thy boast,
My resolution, husband, do thou take;
My low-declined honour to advance?
My life's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it.
'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife 1235
'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break
My fame and thy perpetual infamy.'
'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd 1855
'My body or my soul, which was the dearer,
My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
My Collatine would else have come to me
Much like a press of people at a door,
More feeling-painful: let it then suffice 1730
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping:
'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night,
Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound;
'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
Met far from home, wondering each other's chance.
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, 1755
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
Many she sees where cares have carved some,
Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear,
Making such sober action with his hand,
Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.
Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair: 1180
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody:
'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid,
Losing her woes in shows of discontent.
'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd.
'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss,
Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling: 1285
Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.
Like bright things stain'd, a kind of heavy fear.
Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still,
Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny. 1780
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
Let sin, alone committed, light alone
Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool, 1870
'Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
'Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
Let him have time to live a loathed slave, 1035
Let him have time of Time's help to despair,
Let him have time against himself to rave,
Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave,
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe:
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright;
Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow:
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends: 1015
Lays open all the little worms that creep;
Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood: 1325
Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.' 1745
Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.'
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
'I will not poison thee with my attaint,
It seem'd they would debate with angry swords.
It easeth some, though none it ever cured,
'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook,
'It cannot be,' quoth she,'that so much guile'-- 1585
Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild
Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood. 1080
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow
I should not live to speak another word;
Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill:
I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.'
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;
'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain 1095
In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite:
'In vain I rail at Opportunity,
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
Into so bright a day such black-faced storms,
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born; 1810
In such relenting dew of lamentations; 1880
In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white,
In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life:
In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past:
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain 1300
In me moe woes than words are now depending;
In him the painter labour'd with his skill
In her the painter had anatomized
In great commanders grace and majesty
In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigor roll'd;
In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art 1445
Immaculate and spotless is my mind;
Imagine every eye beholds their blame; 1395
I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue;
I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee 1685
If thou my love's desire do contradict.
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,
If they surcease to be that should survive.
If tears could help, mine own would do me good.
If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole
If in the child the father's image lies,
If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see--
I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain,
If children predecease progenitors,
I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack!
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!
'How may this forced stain be wiped from me?
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me:
Honour thyself to rid me of this shame:
Holds disputation with each thing she views,
His time of folly and his time of sport;
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear
His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear;
His leaves will wither and his sap decay;
His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content;
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;
Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw;
Himself himself seek every hour to kill!
He with the Romans was esteemed so
He weeps for her, for she was only mine,
He ten times pines that pines beholding food;
He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute
Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly
Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted,
Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow, 1270
Her mansion batter'd by the enemy;
Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,
Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares.
Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ
'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted,
Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe;
Her grief, but not her grief's true quality: 1365
Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw,
Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head,
Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and red;
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds,
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,
Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes:
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed:
Here, all enraged, such passion her assails,
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeath'd
Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy 1280
Her cheeks with chaps and wrinkles were disguised;
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.
Her body's stain her mind untainted clears;
Her blue blood changed to black in every vein, 1505
Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;
Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more; 1840
He hath no power to ask her how she fares: 1645
He gratis comes; and thou art well appaid 965
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
He entertain'd a show so seeming just, 1565
He doth again repeat, and that they swore.
Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t' afford--
Have time to wail th' abusing of his time. 1045
Have heard the cause of my untimely death;
Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand? 1650
Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue;
Had doting Priam cheque'd his son's desire,
Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift,
Guilty of perjury and subornation, 970
Guilty of incest, that abomination;
Grossly engirt with daring infamy:
Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind,
Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts,
Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.
Grief best is pleased with grief's society:
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;
'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen:
Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, 1065
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust:
From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me
From the creation to the general doom. 975
From that suspicion which the world might bear her.
From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free. 1675
From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow
For why her face wore sorrow's livery;
For who so base would such an office have
For 'tis a meritorious fair design
For then eye interprets to the ear
For sportive words and uttering foolish things:
For sparing justice feeds iniquity.
For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,
'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine,' quoth he,
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me:
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story
For one's offence why should so many fall,
For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, and groan:
For much imaginary work was there;
For me, I force not argument a straw,
'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,
For me, I am the mistress of my fate, 1120
For more it is than I can well express:
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy; 1160
For men have marble, women waxen, minds,
For if I die, my honour lives in thee;
For in my death I murder shameful scorn: 1240
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? 1875
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
Foretell new storms to those already spent. 1640
For day hath nought to do what's done by night.'
For Lucrece thought he blush'd to her see shame:
'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.'
For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies.
For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds:
'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted.
For burden-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still,
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
For Helen's rape the city to destroy,
First hovering o'er the paper with her quill:
'Few words,' quoth she, 'Shall fit the trespass best,
False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say 'So be it:' 1260
Extremity still urgeth such extremes.
Even so this pattern of the worn-out age
Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet
Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw,
Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast
Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse.
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Each present lord began to promise aid,
Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye;
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?
Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.' 1710
'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, 1025
Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.
Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.
Devise extremes beyond extremity, 1020
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,
Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; 1070
'Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth
'Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed 1670
'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries,
'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart
Corrupted blood some watery token shows;
Continuance tames the one; the other wild,
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight; 1350
Comparing him to that unhappy guest
Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die;
'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment,
Circles her body in on every side, 1790
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so
Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep:
By this, starts Collatine as from a dream,
By this short schedule Collatine may know
By this, lamenting Philomel had ended 1130
By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased. 1885
By whose example thou revenged mayest be. 1245
By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving.'
Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me 985
By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak
By that her death, to do her husband wrong: 1315
By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store,
By foul enforcement might be done to me,
By deep surmise of others' detriment; 1630
By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd,
But, wretched as he is, he strives in vain;
But with my body my poor soul's pollution?
But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife:
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.
But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought
But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth 1090
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie
But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent 1450
'But tell me, girl, when went'--and there she stay'd
But such a face should bear a wicked mind.
But she, that yet her sad task hath not said, 1750
But now the mindful messenger, come back,
But now that fresh fair mirror, dim and old,
But now he throws that shallow habit by, 1865
But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd,
But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak;
But long she thinks till he return again,
But little stars may hide them when they list.
But, like a constant and confirmed devil,
'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,
But kneel with me and help to bear thy part,
But if the like the snow-white swan desire,
But if I live, thou livest in my defame:
'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she,
But eagles gazed upon with every eye.
But durst not ask of her audaciously
But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, 1135
But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd:
But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,
But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while,
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;
Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show.
Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side,
Brings home his lord and other company; 1635
Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance,
Blushing at that which is so putrified.
Blue circles stream'd; like rainbows in the sky:
Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear
Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;
Betray'd the hours thou gavest me to repose,
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Besides, the life and feeling of her passion
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought
Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance?
Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.
Begrimed with sweat, and smeared all with dust;
Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending;
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, 1860
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece. 1420
Become the public plague of many moe? 1530
Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare;
Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate.
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests:
At this request, with noble disposition
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast;
Ay me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine,
At length address'd to answer his desire,
At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord 1355
At last she smilingly with this gives o'er;
At last she sees a wretched image bound,
At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er:
At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,
A thousand lamentable objects there, 1425
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid:
At his own shadow let the thief run mad,
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night; 1075
'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.'
As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.
As well to hear as grant what he hath said.
As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight;
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay
As through an arch the violent roaring tide
As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze, 1200
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,
As smoke from AEtna, that in air consumes,
As slanderous death's-man to so base a slave?
As silly-jeering idiots are with kings,
As shaming any eye should thee behold,
Assail'd by night with circumstances strong
As lagging fowls before the northern blast:
As if with grief or travail he had fainted,
As if some mermaid did their ears entice,
As heaven, it seem'd, to kiss the turrets bow'd.
As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,
As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words,
Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city. 1605
A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
Answer'd their cries, 'my daughter' and 'my wife.'
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long;
And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes 1520
And with deep groans the diapason bear;
And why not I from this compelled stain?'
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear;
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.
And with my trespass never will dispense,
And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament.
And who cannot abuse a body dead?
'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part,
And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies.
And what wrong else may be imagined
And waste huge stones with little water drops. 1010
And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe,
And unperceived fly with the filth away;
And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel;
And turn'd it thus,' It cannot be, I find, 1590
And to their hope they such odd action yield,
And to his protestation urged the rest, 1895
And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
And time to see one that by alms doth live
And time doth weary time with her complaining.
And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event
And therefore now I need not fear to die.
And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.
And therein so ensconced his secret evil,
And therefore still in night would cloister'd be.
And therefore are they form'd as marble will;
And that deep torture may be call'd a hell
And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream 1825
And the dire thought of his committed evil
And that deep vow, which Brutus made before,
And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts. 1290
And then against my heart he sets his sword,
And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.'
And swear I found you where you did fulfil
And still on him she gazed; and gazing still,
And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence:
And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow,
And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.
And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd.
And solemn night with slow sad gait descended
And softly cried 'Awake, thou Roman dame,
And smear with dust their glittering golden towers;
And shivered all the beauty of my glass,
And shapes her sorrow to the beldam's woes,
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping;
And round about her tear-stained eye
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong;
And only must be wail'd by Collatine.' 1850
And one man's lust these many lives confounds: 1540
And now this pale swan in her watery nest
And never be forgot in mighty Rome 1695
And my laments would be drawn out too long,
And merry fools to mock at him resort; 1040
And live to be revenged on her death.
And little stars shot from their fixed places,
And let mild women to him lose their mildness, 1030
And leave the faltering feeble souls alive?
And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow;
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear, 1470
And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell;
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb:
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:
And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,
And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy 1480
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
And from the strand of Dardan, where they fought,
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew 1785
And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took:
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.
'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day,
'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so,
And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so.
And far the weaker with so strong a fear:
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes,
And ever let his unrecalling crime
And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.
And entertain my love; else lasting shame 1680
And dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights, 1430
And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound,
And counterfeits to die with her a space;
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill,
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd,
And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd 1890
And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide
And both she thinks too long with her remaining:
And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed;
And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye
And blood untainted still doth red abide, 1800
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes:
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;
And as one shifts, another straight ensues: 1155
And as his due writ in my testament.
And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly,
And all my fame that lives disbursed be
An accessary by thine inclination
Amazedly in her sad face he stares:
All jointly listening, but with several graces,
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear; 1345
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed: 1775
A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;
A dying life to living infamy:
A creeping creature, with a flaming light,
About the mourning and congealed face 1795
About him were a press of gaping faces,
A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe; 1560
Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?
A badge of fame to slander's livery; 1105
Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally,
'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive,
Writ in the glassy margents of such books:
Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate,
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;
With your uncleanness that which is divine;
With such black payment as thou hast pretended;
'With rotten damps ravish the morning air;
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:
Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory:
Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake,
Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage
'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?
Who with a lingering slay his course doth let,
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd:
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.
Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth:
Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week?
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd,
Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show,
Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw
While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.
While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation
Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,
Which to her oratory adds more grace.
Which once corrupted takes the worser part;
Which in her prescience she controlled still,
Whether it is that she reflects so bright,
Which in a moment doth confound and kill
Which, having all, all could not satisfy;
Which blows these pitchy vapours from their bidding,
Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show:
Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field,
Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye;
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard:
Where subjects' eyes do learn, do read, do look.
'Where now I have no one to blush with me,
Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies,
Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd,
Where her beloved Collatinus lies.
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer,
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring!
When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?
When they in thee the like offences prove:
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul sin may say,
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.
When he himself himself confounds, betrays
When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes:
'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?
What following sorrow may on this arise:
What darest thou not when once thou art a king?
'Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child,
Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame!
Urging the worser sense for vantage still;
Upon the world dim darkness doth display,
Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.'
Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
Unto a view so false will not incline;
Until her husband's welfare she did hear;
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.
True valour still a true respect should have;
To wish that I their father had not bin.
To wink, being blinded with a greater light:
To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
To view thy present trespass in another.
To those two armies that would let him go,
To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste
'To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal,
To strike a poor unseasonable doe.
To soften it with their continual motion;
To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?
To privilege dishonour in thy name?
To mask their brows and hide their infamy; 845
To living death and pain perpetual:
To have their unseen sin remain untold;
To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.
To darken her whose light excelleth thine:
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
To cloak offences with a cunning brow.
To cipher me how fondly I did dote;
To be thy partner in this shameful doom.'
To ask the spotted princess how she fares.
To all the host of heaven I complain me,
Till every minute pays the hour his debt.
Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed,
withal suddenly stabbed herself. Which done, with one consent
whom Collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity of his wife
was, according to his estate, royally entertained and lodged by
they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the
the victory, and his wife the fame. At that time Sextus
the principal men of the army meeting one evening at the tent of
the people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a
that which every one had before avouched, only Collatinus finds
supper every one commended the virtues of his own wife: among
revenge, revealed the actor, and whole manner of his dealing, and
possessed himself of the kingdom, went, accompanied with his sons
people were so moved, that with one consent and a general
of her sorrow. She, first taking an oath of them for her
not requiring or staying for the people's suffrages, had
maids: the other ladies were all found dancing and revelling, or
intending, by their secret and sudden arrival, to make trial of
in several disports. Whereupon the noblemen yielded Collatinus
his wife, though it were late in the night, spinning amongst her
his passions for the present, departed with the rest back to the
government changed from kings to consuls.
To be admired of lewd unhallow'd eyes.
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd
Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear,
Till like a jade Self-will himself doth tire.
Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me:
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfil,
morning speedeth away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight,
into her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the
hastily dispatcheth messengers, one to Rome for her father,
cruelly murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs,
camp; from whence he shortly after privily withdrew himself, and
another to the camp for Collatine. They came, the one
and finding Lucrece attired in mourning habit, demanded the cause
accompanied with Junius Brutus, the other with Publius Valerius;
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;
bitter invective against the tyranny of the king: wherewith the
and other noblemen of Rome, to besiege Ardea. During which siege
acclamation the Tarquins were all exiled, and the state
after he had caused his own father-in-law Servius Tullius to be
Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy.'
Yea the illiterate, that know not how
Yet for thy honour did I entertain him;
'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack;
Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages, 960
Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour's blot:
With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells.
With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.
With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night.
Without the bed her other fair hand was,
With more than admiration he admired
Within whose face beauty and virtue strived
Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.
Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame;
'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking;
Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies:
Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
Who, like a foul ursurper, went about
Who in their pride do presently abuse it: 915
Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season; 930
Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
While she, the picture of pure piety,
Which virtue gave the golden age to gild
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight,
Which of them both should underprop her fame:
Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!
Which, like a falcon towering in the skies,
Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire
Which he by dumb demeanor seeks to show;
Which I to conquer sought with all my might;
Where thou with patience must my will abide;
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties,
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? 950
'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend,
When virtue is profaned in such a devil!
When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame;
When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white.
When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
When at Collatium this false lord arrived,
When Collatine unwisely did not let
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;
What virtue breeds iniquity devours:
What terror or 'tis! but she, in worser taking,
What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
What needeth then apologies be made,
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
What did he note but strongly he desired?
What could he see but mightily he noted?
Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame,
We have no good that we can say is ours,
Virtue would stain that o'er with silver white.
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins:
'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring; 920
Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state;
Under what colour he commits this ill.
Under that colour am I come to scale
To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,
To set forth that which is so singular?
To praise the clear unmatched red and white
To make the breach and enter this sweet city.
To kill thine honour with thy life's decay;
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.
To sound a parley to his heartless foe;
To quench the coal which in his liver glows.
To cipher what is writ in learned books,
'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason;
'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason:
Till they might open to adorn the day.
Thy violent vanities can never last. 945
Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste:
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,
'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,
Thy private feasting to a public fast,
Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine,
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
Thy issue blurr'd with nameless bastardy:
Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief! 940
Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried;
Thou black'st reproach against long-living laud,
Those that much covet are with gain so fond,
Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm;
Through little vents and crannies of the place
Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name.
Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king;
Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me.
Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same,
Through Night's black bosom should not peep again:
Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.'
Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining:
Though death be adjunct, there's no death supposed.
Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm;
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch,
This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen,
This earthly saint, adored by this devil,
Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old!
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,
Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face,
Thus, graceless, holds he disputation
'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave:
Thou smother'st honesty, thou murder'st troth;
Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get;
Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud:
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;
'Thou makest the vestal violate her oath;
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride:
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds:
This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king;
This siege that hath engirt his marriage,
Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd; 935
Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd!
This momentary joy breeds months of pain;
This forced league doth force a further strife;
This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
This hot desire converts to cold disdain:
This dying virtue, this surviving shame,
'This deed will make thee only loved for fear;
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
This bateless edge on his keen appetite;
'Think but how vile a spectacle it were,
'They think not but that every eye can see
They scatter and unloose it from their bond,
They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.
The worst is but denial and reproving:
The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries;
The wind wars with his torch to make him stay,
The threshold grates the door to have him heard;
The thing we have; and, all for want of wit,
The things we are for that which we expect;
The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours
The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining;
The story of sweet chastity's decay,
The spots whereof could weeping purify,
The sovereignty of either being so great,
The silver-shining queen he would distain;
The silly lambs: pure thoughts are dead and still,
The sight which makes supposed terror true.
The shame that from them no device can take,
The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred;
The scornful mark of every open eye;
The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;
The same disgrace which they themselves behold;
Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
The prey wherein by nature they delight;
The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,
The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted
The petty streams that pay a daily debt
'The patient dies while the physician sleeps; 955
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;
The orator, to deck his oratory,
Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?'
Then white as lawn, the roses took away.
Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?
Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red,
'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story,
Then my digression is so vile, so base,
Then looking scornfully, he doth despise
Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.
The niggard prodigal that praised her so,--
Then had they seen the period of their ill;
'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake,
'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die!
'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!
Then Collatine again, by Lucrece' side,
The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.'
The locks between her chamber and his will,
The light will show, character'd in my brow,
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
The lesser thing should not the greater hide;
Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield;
Their silent war of lilies and of roses,
Their own transgressions partially they smother:
Their father was too weak, and they too strong,
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow: 860
The guilty rebel for remission prays.
The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;
The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace,
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;
The eyes of men without an orator;
The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch:
The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him,
The death of all, and all together lost.
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
The curtains being close, about he walks,
The coward captive vanquished doth yield
The branches of another root are rotted,
The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution;
The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed.
The coward fights and will not be dismay'd.
The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot,
The blemish that will never be forgot;
The aim of all is but to nurse the life
'The aged man that coffers-up his gold
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;
The Rape of Lucrece
The Argument
That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.
That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.
That to his borrow'd bed he make retire,
That through the length of times he stands disgraced:
That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.'
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.
That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed.
That some impurity doth not pollute. 905
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
That one for all, or all for one we gage;
That oft they interchange each other's seat.
That now he vows a league, and now invasion.
That nothing in him seem'd inordinate,
That my posterity, shamed with the note
That kings might be espoused to more fame,
That it will live engraven in my face.
That is as clear from this attaint of mine
That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,
That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,
That golden hap which their superiors want.
That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!
That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;
That for his prey to pray he doth begin,
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;
That eye which him beholds, as more divine,
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
That even for anger makes the lily pale,
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee
That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;
That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more.
That all the faults which in thy reign are made 855
Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot
Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.
Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted
Tarquinius being inflamed with Lucrece' beauty, yet smothering
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries;
Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting:
That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay,
Suggested this proud issue of a king;
Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;
So under his insulting falchion lies
'So thy surviving husband shall remain
'So then he hath it when he cannot use it,
So that in venturing ill we leave to be
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night:
So should I have co-partners in my pain; 840
'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,
'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state'--
So his unhallow'd haste her words delays,
'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time,
Some purer chest to close so pure a mind.
Soft pity enters at an iron gate.
So from himself impiety hath wrought,
So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,
So cross him with their opposite persuasion,
So Lucrece must I force to my desire.'
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer
Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand
She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;
Show'd like an April daisy on the grass,
She there remains a hopeless castaway;
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.
Showing life's triumph in the map of death,
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks;
She says, her subjects with foul insurrection
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,
Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side,
She, much amazed, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes,
She puts the period often from his place;
She prays she never may behold the day,
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
She conjures him by high almighty Jove,
'Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known:
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;
She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear;
She bears the load of lust he left behind,
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale:
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes,
Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin
Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.'
Sextus Tarquinius, the king's son, in their discourses after
Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood.
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake.
Save something too much wonder of his eye,
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage;
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;
Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!--
Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head:
Respect and reason, wait on wrinkled age!
Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face, 880
Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;
Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate,
Rather than triumph in so false a foe.
Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality
Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand,
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes:
Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch:
Proving from world's minority their right:
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;
Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.
Pleads, in a wilderness where are no laws,
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,
Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty
Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.
Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;
Pain pays the income of each precious thing;
'O, what excuse can my invention make,
'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace!
O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar!
O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!
'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!
Or why is Collatine the publisher
Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
Or kings be breakers of their own behests?
Or kills his life or else his quality.
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? 900
Or, gaining more, the profit of excess
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd?
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold,
On the green coverlet; whose perfect white
Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;
O modest wantons! wanton modesty!
O impious act, including all foul harms!
O, if no harder than a stone thou art,
O, how her fear did make her colour rise!
'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night!
O, had they in that darksome prison died!
O, how are they wrapp'd in with infamies
O happiness enjoy'd but of a few!
Of that we have: so then we do neglect
Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown
O foul dishonour to my household's grave!
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine:
Of either's colour was the other queen,
Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.
O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit
'O comfort-killing Night, image of hell!
O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting,
'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great!
'O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke, 850
Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue,--
Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
Now serves the season that they may surprise
Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight;
Now is he come unto the chamber-door,
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier:
Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies
Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting,
Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.
No penetrable entrance to her plaining:
No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries;
No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee:
No comfortable star did lend his light,
No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather
Night-wandering weasels shriek to see him there;
Neglected all, with swift intent he goes
My will that marks thee for my earth's delight,
My will is strong, past reason's weak removing.
My will is back'd with resolution:
My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee:
Myself a weakling; do not then ensnare me:
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage:
'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me:
My honour lost, and I, a drone-like bee,
My heart shall never countermand mine eye:
Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight.
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee;
More than his eyes were open'd to the light.
Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,
Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed?
Might have excuse to work upon his wife,
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear;
Melt at my tears, and be compassionate!
May set at noon and make perpetual night. 835
May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!
Lucretia. In that pleasant humour they posted to Rome; and
'Make me not object to the tell-tale Day!
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended;
May feel her heart-poor citizen!--distress'd,
Make war against proportion'd course of time; 825
Make something nothing by augmenting it.
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk
Made glorious by his manly chivalry
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,
Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks:
'Lucrece,' quoth he,'this night I must enjoy thee:
Lucrece at Collatium. The same night he treacherously stealeth
Lucius Tarquinius, for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus,
Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth:
Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,
Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,
Little suspecteth the false worshipper;
Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies;
Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case:
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring,
Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws,
Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick 830
Let not the jealous Day behold that face
'Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire:
Let fair humanity abhor the deed
Left there round turrets destitute and pale.
Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain.
Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;
I think the honey guarded with a sting;
I sue for exiled majesty's repeal;
Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits;
Is not inured; return again in haste;
Is madly toss'd between desire and dread;
'I see what crosses my attempt will bring;
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
Is almost choked by unresisted lust.
Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face;
Intending weariness with heavy spright;
Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee;
In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept, 890
In the possession of his beauteous mate;
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;
In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,
In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.
In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding,
In his clear bed might have reposed still:
In having much, torments us with defect
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
In a pure compound; being so applied,
'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee:
Immodestly lies martyr'd with disgrace!
Imagine her as one in dead of night
I'll beg her love; but she is own:
I know what thorns the growing rose defends;
I know repentant tears ensue the deed,
'I have debated, even in my soul,
If thou deny, then force must work my way,
If that be made a theme for disputation,
If in thy hope thou darest do such outrage,
If ever man were moved with woman moans,
If but for fear of this, thy will remove;
If all these pretty ills shall change thy good,
'If Collatinus dream of my intent,
'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me, 885
Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands,
'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
How comes it then, vile Opportunity,
How can they then assist me in the act?
How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine. 870
Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost
Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms,
His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
His venom in effect is purified.
His true respect will prison false desire,
His taste delicious, in digestion souring,
His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust,
His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,
His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt
His hand, that yet remains upon her breast,--
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,
His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those:
Hindering their present fall by this dividing;
Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty;
He thence departs a heavy convertite;
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
He takes for accidental things of trial;
He stories to her ears her husband's fame,
He scowls and hates himself for his offence;
He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loathed delight.
Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled,
Her tears should drop on them perpetually.
Her sad behavior feeds his vulture folly,
Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix'd
He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix'd,
Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express,
Her immortality, and made her thrall
Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath;
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye
Here she exclaims against repose and rest,
Here pale with fear he doth premeditate
Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.
Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue,
Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
He pens her piteous clamours in her head;
He makes excuses for his being there:
He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;
He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way?
He is no woodman that doth bend his bow
He in the worst sense construes their denial:
He in his speed looks for the morning light;
He faintly flies, sneaking with guilty fear;
Having solicited th' eternal power
Having no other pleasure of his gain
Have no perfection of my summer left,
'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide
Have batter'd down her consecrated wall,
Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing be sought.
Hateful it is; there is no hate in loving:
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?
'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee,
Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells
Haply that name of 'chaste' unhappily set
'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire,
Grim cave of death! whispering conspirator
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd?
Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust;
From vassal actors can be wiped away;
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.
From thievish ears, because it is his own?
From the besieged Ardea all in post,
From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
From me by strong assault it is bereft.
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get,
From a pure heart command thy rebel will:
From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field:
Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite
For with the nightly linen that she wears
For what they have not, that which they possess
For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil;
For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
For there it revels; and when that decays,
For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
For that he colour'd with his high estate,
For stones dissolved to water do convert.
For princes are the glass, the school, the book,
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
For now against himself he sounds this doom,
For marks descried in men's nativity
For light and lust are deadly enemies:
For lawful policy remains enacted.
For kings like gods should govern everything.
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.
For it had been dishonour to disdain him: 895
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee:
For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent,
'For day,' quoth she, 'nights scapes doth open lay,
Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear!
For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be:
For, after supper, long he questioned
For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted:
First red as roses that on lawn we lay,
First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin
Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band,
Far from the purpose of his coming hither,
'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not
Extinguishing his conduct in this case;
Even there he starts: quoth he, 'I must deflower:
Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,
Even in the moment that we call them ours.
Ere he can see his own abomination.
Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick;
Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold:
End thy ill aim before thy shoot be ended;
Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,
Each one by him enforced, retires his ward;
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt,
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear;
Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
Dim register and notary of shame!
Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.
Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining;
Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.'
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade,
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears
Coming from thee, I could not put him back,
Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire,
Can comprehend in still imagination!
By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.
By their high treason is his heart misled;
By reprobate desire thus madly led,
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath,
By holy human law, and common troth,
By her untimely tears, her husband's love,
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
But will is deaf and hears no heedful friends;
But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat,
But torment that it cannot cure his pain.
But they ne'er meet with Opportunity.
But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;
But that life lived in death, and death in life.
But some untimely thought did instigate
But she with vehement prayers urgeth still
But she, that never coped with stranger eyes,
But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,
But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft:
But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store,
But nothing can affection's course control,
But no perfection is so absolute,
But low shrubs wither at the cedar's root.
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,
But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.
But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,
But ill-annexed Opportunity 925
'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend:
But honest fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm,
But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,
But her foresight could not forestall their will.
But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love:
But coward-like with trembling terror die.
But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.
But beauty, in that white intituled,
But, as they open, they all rate his ill,
But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;
But I alone alone must sit and pine,
Braving compare, disdainfully did sting
Both which, as servitors to the unjust,
Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,
Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame!
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell!
Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,
Birds never limed no secret bushes fear:
Between whose hills her head entombed is:
Besides, of weariness he did complain him,
Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced;
Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans:
Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?
Beauty itself doth of itself persuade
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.
Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart,
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
Away he steals with open listening ear,
Authority for sin, warrant for blame,
As who should say 'This glove to wanton tricks
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth:
As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey,
As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage.
As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving
As life for honour in fell battle's rage;
As is the morning's silver-melting dew
As in revenge or quittal of such strife:
As if the heavens should countenance his sin.
As if between them twain there were no strife,
'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,
As each unwilling portal yields him way,
As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear
As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.
Argued by beauty's red and virtue's white
Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms.
Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.'
Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd.
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
An expired date, cancell'd ere well begun:
And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.
And with the wind in greater fury fret:
And with his knee the door he opens wide.
And with good thoughts make dispensation,
And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,
'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?
And when his gaudy banner is display'd,
And when great treasure is the meed proposed,
And therefore would they still in darkness be,
And useless barns the harvest of his wits; 910
And undeserved reproach to him allotted 875
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly,
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire
And thou, the author of their obloquy,
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
And therein heartens up his servile powers,
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace,
And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek,
And talk'd of virtue: O unlook'd-for evil,
And sung by children in succeeding times.
And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept.
And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.
And so, by hoping more, they have but less;
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,
And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed,
And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.
And my true eyes have never practised how
And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.
And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,
And makest fair reputation but a bawd.
And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood
And let thy misty vapours march so thick,
And leaves it to be master'd by his young;
And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:
And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
And in his will his wilful eye he tired.
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,
And in the self-same seat sits Collatine:
And in his inward mind he doth debate
And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight
And he the burden of a guilty mind.
And he hath won what he would lose again:
And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,
And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes,
And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done
'And how her hand, in my hand being lock'd
And him by oath they truly honoured.
And griping it, the needle his finger pricks;
And girdle with embracing flames the waist
And in her vaulty prison stows the Day.
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.
And fright her with confusion of their cries:
And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; 865
And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,
And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
And every one to rest themselves betake,
And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty.
And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot
And death's dim look in life's mortality:
And for himself himself be must forsake:
And decks with praises Collatine's high name,
And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd?
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.
And being lighted, by the light he spies
And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;
And as their captain, so their pride doth grow,
And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar,
And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.
A martial man to be soft fancy's slave!
'All which together, like a troubled ocean,
All this beforehand counsel comprehends:
All pure effects, and doth so far proceed,
All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth;
A little harm done to a great good end
Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,
Against the unseen secrecy of night:
Against the golden splendor of the sun!
Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution.
Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;
Advice is sporting while infection breeds:
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.
Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.'
A captive victor that hath lost in gain;
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
But ill-annexed Opportunity 925
This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
But they ne'er meet with Opportunity.
Of spirit, Life, and bold audacity.
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, 1575
Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy:
'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story,
The orator, to deck his oratory,
She dares not thereof make discovery,
Made glorious by his manly chivalry
Those round clear pearls of his, that move thy pity,
How comes it then, vile Opportunity,
'Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity,
Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty;
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,
O modest wantons! wanton modesty!
Or kills his life or else his quality.
Then let it not be call'd impiety, 1225
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty
For marks descried in men's nativity
Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;
Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality
The little birds that tune their morning's joy
Threatening cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;
And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty.
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory:
'With this, I did begin to start and cry; 1690
Devise extremes beyond extremity, 1020
With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty,
For Helen's rape the city to destroy,
And death's dim look in life's mortality:
A badge of fame to slander's livery; 1105
Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city. 1605
And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy 1480
In great commanders grace and majesty
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;
'In vain I rail at Opportunity,
Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory
Grief best is pleased with grief's society:
And thou, the author of their obloquy,
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity,
Her grief, but not her grief's true quality: 1365
For sparing justice feeds iniquity.
To make the breach and enter this sweet city.
While she, the picture of pure piety,
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story
For why her face wore sorrow's livery;
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy; 1160
Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
So with herself is she in mutiny,
Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny. 1780
Sad souls are slain in merry company;
Brings home his lord and other company; 1635
Her mansion batter'd by the enemy;
To mask their brows and hide their infamy; 845
Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.'
My fame and thy perpetual infamy.'
A dying life to living infamy:
Grossly engirt with daring infamy:
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy.'
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
But durst not ask of her audaciously
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.
Her sad behavior feeds his vulture folly,
Her tears should drop on them perpetually.
Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally,
That cannot tread the way out readily;
To talk in deeds, while others saucily 1400
Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, 1065
And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
Wildly determining which way to fly,
That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;
Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly
Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely:
And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly,
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly,
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;
Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky,
Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky.
Blue circles stream'd; like rainbows in the sky:
Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy 1280
Which, having all, all could not satisfy;
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
The spots whereof could weeping purify,
As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey,
Thy issue blurr'd with nameless bastardy:
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody:
But now he throws that shallow habit by, 1865
was, according to his estate, royally entertained and lodged by
If thou deny, then force must work my way,
Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.
As each unwilling portal yields him way,
Some dark deep desert, seated from the way, 1195
He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way?
She there remains a hopeless castaway;
While with a joyless smile she turns away
Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away,
Then white as lawn, the roses took away.
And unperceived fly with the filth away;
And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.
Replies her husband: 'do not take away
So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away. 1220
From vassal actors can be wiped away;
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
The wind wars with his torch to make him stay,
The stain upon his silver down will stay.
That she her plaints a little while doth stay,
When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul sin may say,
My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say
With this, they all at once began to say, 1760
'Then be this all the task it hath to say
And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay. 1845
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay
To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!
That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay,
Upon the world dim darkness doth display,
'For day,' quoth she, 'nights scapes doth open lay,
First red as roses that on lawn we lay,
Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day:
Myself was stirring ere the break of day,
Till they might open to adorn the day.
'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day,
She prays she never may behold the day,
The story of sweet chastity's decay,
To kill thine honour with thy life's decay;
His leaves will wither and his sap decay;
'Make me not object to the tell-tale Day!
And in her vaulty prison stows the Day.
And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow;
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow: 860
The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow,
And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow,
Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, 1620
To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow;
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow
Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow, 1270
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow:
She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.
And as their captain, so their pride doth grow,
The light will show, character'd in my brow,
To cloak offences with a cunning brow.
As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.
By this short schedule Collatine may know
'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
She modestly prepares to let them know
The homely villain court'sies to her low; 1390
Who, wondering at him, did his words allow:
From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow
Yea the illiterate, that know not how
Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show.
Which he by dumb demeanor seeks to show;
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show:
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow
To hide deceit, and give the harmless show
Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show,
And my true eyes have never practised how
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow;
He is no woodman that doth bend his bow
Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw;
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew 1785
The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew
Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew;
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
The credulous old Priam after slew;
From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,
O happiness enjoy'd but of a few!
As is the morning's silver-melting dew
Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw
Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,
Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw,
For me, I force not argument a straw,
Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw,
To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.
Since that my case is past the help of law.
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.
Who, like a foul ursurper, went about
That jealousy itself could not mistrust
His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust;
Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?
The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust, 1435
False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust
She thought he blush'd, as knowing Tarquin's lust,
Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust:
His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust,
Is almost choked by unresisted lust.
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:
Both which, as servitors to the unjust,
He entertain'd a show so seeming just, 1565
Begrimed with sweat, and smeared all with dust;
From the besieged Ardea all in post,
The death of all, and all together lost.
'Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,
Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost
But little stars may hide them when they list.
And girdle with embracing flames the waist
Comparing him to that unhappy guest
And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest:
That blow did that it from the deep unrest
And to his protestation urged the rest, 1895
Here she exclaims against repose and rest,
And now this pale swan in her watery nest
'Few words,' quoth she, 'Shall fit the trespass best,
In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past:
My resolution, love, shall be thy boast,
Thy violent vanities can never last. 945
As lagging fowls before the northern blast:
Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast;
Thy private feasting to a public fast,
Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast
This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,
His hand, that yet remains upon her breast,--
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
That patience is quite beaten from her breast.
And merry fools to mock at him resort; 1040
His time of folly and his time of sport;
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
For stones dissolved to water do convert.
O, if no harder than a stone thou art,
In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art 1445
'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part,
But kneel with me and help to bear thy part,
Which once corrupted takes the worser part;
To imitate thee well, against my heart
'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart
The face of either cipher'd either's heart;
Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart,
But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt,
In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept, 890
And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept.
But low shrubs wither at the cedar's root.
The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot,
'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not
Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot
And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot
Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour's blot:
The blemish that will never be forgot;
His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt
'I will not poison thee with my attaint,
My sable ground of sin I will not paint, 1125
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event
For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent,
Why art thou thus attired in discontent?
Losing her woes in shows of discontent.
His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content;
'If Collatinus dream of my intent,
The Romans plausibly did give consent 1905
withal suddenly stabbed herself. Which done, with one consent
Foretell new storms to those already spent. 1640
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?
That she with painted images hath spent;
Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,
These means, as frets upon an instrument,
The Argument
Show'd deep regard and smiling government.
By deep surmise of others' detriment; 1630
'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment,
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,
Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.
To Tarquin's everlasting banishment.
These water-galls in her dim element
And as his due writ in my testament.
And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament.
But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent 1450
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent:
What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
That golden hap which their superiors want.
Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;
The thing we have; and, all for want of wit,
That thou art doting father of his fruit. 1115
The post attends, and she delivers it, 1385
Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ
The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.'
They that lose half with greater patience bear it
Make something nothing by augmenting it.
'So then he hath it when he cannot use it,
Who in their pride do presently abuse it: 915
'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack, what were it,
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!
My life's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it.
O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say 'So be it:' 1260
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing be sought.
So from himself impiety hath wrought,
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought
'Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought,
And from the strand of Dardan, where they fought,
But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;
And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight
Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight: 1455
Proving from world's minority their right:
To wrong the wronger till he render right,
Intending weariness with heavy spright;
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright;
To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,
Whether it is that she reflects so bright,
Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.
The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
For day hath nought to do what's done by night.'
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night:
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,
She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night:
May set at noon and make perpetual night. 835
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
Against the unseen secrecy of night:
With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night.
Imagine her as one in dead of night
Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:
To wake the morn and sentinel the night,
'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,
Which I to conquer sought with all my might;
No comfortable star did lend his light,
Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light,
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
To wink, being blinded with a greater light:
morning speedeth away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight,
To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light,
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,
He in his speed looks for the morning light;
A creeping creature, with a flaming light,
Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight:
More than his eyes were open'd to the light.
This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
The prey wherein by nature they delight;
Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.'
Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight,
My will that marks thee for my earth's delight,
Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight.
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loathed delight.
That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight; 1350
As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight;
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;
Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight;
Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night,
'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night!
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night; 1075
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift,
From me by strong assault it is bereft.
Have no perfection of my summer left,
But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft:
Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,
Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet
Haply that name of 'chaste' unhappily set
But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
And with the wind in greater fury fret:
They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
When Collatine unwisely did not let
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.
Who with a lingering slay his course doth let,
Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get;
From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get,
On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
If thou my love's desire do contradict.
The things we are for that which we expect;
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
Of that we have: so then we do neglect
When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect
In having much, torments us with defect
The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,
How can they then assist me in the act?
The petty streams that pay a daily debt
Till every minute pays the hour his debt.
And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;
That oft they interchange each other's seat.
But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat,
'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great!
The sovereignty of either being so great,
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,
She throws forth Tarquin's name; 'He, he,' she says,
When he himself himself confounds, betrays
The guilty rebel for remission prays.
And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.
So his unhallow'd haste her words delays,
Till after many accents and delays, 1770
To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?
For there it revels; and when that decays,
Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.
Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!
To quench the coal which in his liver glows.
Who being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows; 1170
Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,
Corrupted blood some watery token shows;
No object but her passion's strength renews;
Holds disputation with each thing she views,
Pleads, in a wilderness where are no laws,
Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws,
the victory, and his wife the fame. At that time Sextus
in several disports. Whereupon the noblemen yielded Collatinus
accompanied with Junius Brutus, the other with Publius Valerius;
Lucius Tarquinius, for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus,
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests:
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; 1175
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? 900
Or kings be breakers of their own behests?
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts,
Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts,
And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts. 1290
To blot old books and alter their contents,
'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;
And useless barns the harvest of his wits; 910
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,
Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits;
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.
Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.
And dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights, 1430
Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across,
Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
For what they have not, that which they possess
For more it is than I can well express:
Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express,
And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.'
Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,
She would request to know your heaviness.' 1335
Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.
And let mild women to him lose their mildness, 1030
And so, by hoping more, they have but less;
The repetition cannot make it less;
Or, gaining more, the profit of excess
And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.
Show'd like an April daisy on the grass,
And shivered all the beauty of my glass,
What virtue breeds iniquity devours:
We have no good that we can say is ours,
The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours
Even in the moment that we call them ours.
To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours, 995
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;
We are their offspring, and they none of ours.
If children predecease progenitors,
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!
To trembling clients be you mediators:
And smear with dust their glittering golden towers;
And therein heartens up his servile powers,
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; 1070
For with the nightly linen that she wears
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears
Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.
Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears.
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Her body's stain her mind untainted clears;
Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;
Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears,
The face, that map which deep impression bears
And waste huge stones with little water drops. 1010
To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;
And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.
'The patient dies while the physician sleeps; 955
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps, 1625
possessed himself of the kingdom, went, accompanied with his sons
In such relenting dew of lamentations; 1880
That they will suffer these abominations,
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins:
His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans:
Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,
Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms,
To chase injustice with revengeful arms:
Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.' 1745
Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;
To make him moan; but pity not his moans:
If ever man were moved with woman moans,
Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.
Into so bright a day such black-faced storms,
Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms. 1570
O impious act, including all foul harms!
Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms.
'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!
cruelly murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs,
Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems:
government changed from kings to consuls.
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;
'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools!
Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells
With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells.
Here, all enraged, such passion her assails,
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, 1615
Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.
Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks;
Poor women's faces are their own fault's books.
Writ in the glassy margents of such books:
To cipher what is writ in learned books,
Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,
They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks.
The curtains being close, about he walks,
Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks:
As who should say 'This glove to wanton tricks
And griping it, the needle his finger pricks;
And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,
That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.
The one doth call her his, the other his,
The father says 'She's mine.' 'O, mine she is,'
Between whose hills her head entombed is:
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, 1000
To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs,
As silly-jeering idiots are with kings,
'Time's glory is to calm contending kings, 990
For sportive words and uttering foolish things:
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes 1520
And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
To cheque the tears in Collatinus' eyes.
'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,
That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes;
That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!
On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes:
But she, that never coped with stranger eyes,
And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes,
She, much amazed, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes,
When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes:
In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.
To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.
To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes,
To be admired of lewd unhallow'd eyes.
Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes,
And as one shifts, another straight ensues: 1155
'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?
Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses;
To hide the truth of this false night's abuses:
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;
Their silent war of lilies and of roses,
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;
Amazedly in her sad face he stares:
To ask the spotted princess how she fares.
He hath no power to ask her how she fares: 1645
Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares.
To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
And shapes her sorrow to the beldam's woes,
So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes.
To endless date of never-ending woes?
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes,
Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes:
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; 1545
Of that black blood a watery rigol goes,
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
Neglected all, with swift intent he goes
Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, 1555
'Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes:
Time's office is to fine the hate of foes;
Stone him with harden'd hearts harder than stones;
Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes,
As smoke from AEtna, that in air consumes,
Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.
And sung by children in succeeding times.
Extremity still urgeth such extremes.
With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.
Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties,
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries;
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, 1510
'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries,
And fright her with confusion of their cries:
No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries;
The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries;
Revealing day through every cranny spies,
And being lighted, by the light he spies
For light and lust are deadly enemies:
Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.
O, how are they wrapp'd in with infamies
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies. 1500
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
Where her beloved Collatinus lies.
So under his insulting falchion lies
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,
Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies;
For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies.
Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?'
Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies,
If in the child the father's image lies,
Which, like a falcon towering in the skies,
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;
And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies.
'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies:
Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies
Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages, 960
Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.
Thus cavils she with every thing she sees:
Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees:
'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, 1025
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,
All jointly listening, but with several graces,
Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces;
And little stars shot from their fixed places,
You might behold, triumphing in their faces; 1440
When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces.
About him were a press of gaping faces,
It seem'd they would debate with angry swords.
With sad attention long to hear her words.
Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words,
And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.
While Collatine and his consorted lords 1660
Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,
Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords.
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds,
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
And one man's lust these many lives confounds: 1540
For men have marble, women waxen, minds,
Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.'
To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds:
The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds
that which every one had before avouched, only Collatinus finds
Unless thou couldst return to make amends?
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends: 1015
But will is deaf and hears no heedful friends;
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
All this beforehand counsel comprehends:
I know what thorns the growing rose defends;
Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands,
The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.'
To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds! 1600
Advice is sporting while infection breeds:
For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds:
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? 1875
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds:
Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds:
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;
Without the bed her other fair hand was,
That I no more can see what once I was! 1815
Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour,
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur
When life is shamed, and death reproach's debtor.
The eyes of men without an orator;
Grim cave of death! whispering conspirator
Now is he come unto the chamber-door,
Much like a press of people at a door,
maids: the other ladies were all found dancing and revelling, or
'Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
Let him have time of Time's help to despair,
Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair: 1180
'Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
'With rotten damps ravish the morning air;
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,
Having solicited th' eternal power
Even there he starts: quoth he, 'I must deflower:
No man inveigh against the wither'd flower, 1305
To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter
With words, till action might become them better. 1375
To live or die which of the twain were better, 1205
So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter,
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,
'To show the beldam daughters of her daughter,
Sextus Tarquinius, the king's son, in their discourses after
That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.'
Whose love of either to myself was nearer,
'My body or my soul, which was the dearer,
Little suspecteth the false worshipper;
At last she smilingly with this gives o'er;
At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er:
There might you see the labouring pioner
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier:
his wife, though it were late in the night, spinning amongst her
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
To view thy present trespass in another.
Their own transgressions partially they smother:
Far from the purpose of his coming hither,
hastily dispatcheth messengers, one to Rome for her father,
No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather
With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!
Or why is Collatine the publisher
of her sorrow. She, first taking an oath of them for her
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her: 1370
From that suspicion which the world might bear her.
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger
'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer,
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
To set forth that which is so singular?
And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar,
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear
Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear;
That with my nails her beauty I may tear.
She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear;
Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear,
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear,
His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear;
That for Achilles' image stood his spear, 1475
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear;
That through their light joy seemed to appear, 1485
Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear;
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear: 1380
Until her husband's welfare she did hear;
Away he steals with open listening ear,
Like bright things stain'd, a kind of heavy fear.
He faintly flies, sneaking with guilty fear;
They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.
Birds never limed no secret bushes fear:
'This deed will make thee only loved for fear;
As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear
Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear!
And far the weaker with so strong a fear:
For then eye interprets to the ear
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear; 1345
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear, 1470
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear
And with deep groans the diapason bear;
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear: 1525
When every part a part of woe doth bear.
Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear,
O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar!
Lays open all the little worms that creep;
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep:
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep:
The grief away that stops his answer so: 1715
Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
The niggard prodigal that praised her so,--
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so.
Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so
Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.'
'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so,
Upon his head that hath transgressed so;
Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, 1275
He with the Romans was esteemed so
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so
Receives the scroll without or yea or no,
To those two armies that would let him go,
From thievish ears, because it is his own?
I'll beg her love; but she is own:
Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown
'Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known:
Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?
Against the golden splendor of the sun!
Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,
Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
An expired date, cancell'd ere well begun:
Shows me a bare-boned death by time out-worn:
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn,
For in my death I murder shameful scorn: 1240
My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born.
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born; 1810
Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern
'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?
Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season; 930
'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason:
'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason;
Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon
To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.
Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution.
My will is back'd with resolution:
The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution;
But with my body my poor soul's pollution?
To soften it with their continual motion;
At this request, with noble disposition
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
She says, her subjects with foul insurrection
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
If that be made a theme for disputation,
Thus, graceless, holds he disputation
'Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
And with good thoughts make dispensation,
Guilty of perjury and subornation, 970
Guilty of incest, that abomination;
Ere he can see his own abomination.
An accessary by thine inclination
Can comprehend in still imagination!
While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion. 1210
Besides, the life and feeling of her passion
That now he vows a league, and now invasion.
So cross him with their opposite persuasion,
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion
As if the heavens should countenance his sin.
Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin
Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.
That for his prey to pray he doth begin,
First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin
Her blue blood changed to black in every vein, 1505
To wish that I their father had not bin.
But, wretched as he is, he strives in vain;
'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain 1095
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
The silver-shining queen he would distain;
And why not I from this compelled stain?'
The weary time she cannot entertain,
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,
So should I have co-partners in my pain; 840
But torment that it cannot cure his pain.
Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain.
This momentary joy breeds months of pain;
'So thy surviving husband shall remain
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain 1300
The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;
Of what she was no semblance did remain:
I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain,
Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,
Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain,
Having no other pleasure of his gain
A captive victor that hath lost in gain;
The poison'd fountain clears itself again;
And he hath won what he would lose again:
What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.
Through Night's black bosom should not peep again:
But long she thinks till he return again,
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.
This hot desire converts to cold disdain:
For 'tis a meritorious fair design
Time's ruin, beauty's wreck, and grim care's reign:
'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen:
What should I say? One of my husband's men
Of either's colour was the other queen,
This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen,
To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran,
For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, and groan:
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, 1415
To break upon the galled shore, and than
With swelling ridges; and their ranks began 1490
'All which together, like a troubled ocean,
Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm;
Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm;
But honest fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm,
Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.
Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
For now against himself he sounds this doom,
To be thy partner in this shameful doom.'
From the creation to the general doom. 975
When they had sworn to this advised doom, 1900
And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
But her foresight could not forestall their will.
The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him,
Through which I may convey this troubled soul.
But nothing can affection's course control,
Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.
Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool, 1870
'Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
The locks between her chamber and his will,
First hovering o'er the paper with her quill:
For burden-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still,
But she with vehement prayers urgeth still
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,
Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still,
Urging the worser sense for vantage still;
But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;
And therefore are they form'd as marble will;
And still on him she gazed; and gazing still,
Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.
Yet for thy honour did I entertain him;
Besides, of weariness he did complain him,
For it had been dishonour to disdain him: 895
Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.
And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream 1825
By this, starts Collatine as from a dream,
'I have debated, even in my soul,
The deep vexation of his inward soul 1830
Who, mad that sorrow should his use control,
'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;
From a pure heart command thy rebel will:
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;
'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,
The silly lambs: pure thoughts are dead and still,
In his clear bed might have reposed still:
Which in her prescience she controlled still,
Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill!
Under what colour he commits this ill.
But, as they open, they all rate his ill,
Then call them not the authors of their ill, 1295
Then had they seen the period of their ill;
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill; 1050
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill:
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill,
In him the painter labour'd with his skill
Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill:
While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill. 1185
With too much labour drowns for want of skill. 1150
Himself himself seek every hour to kill!
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill
But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;
Which in a moment doth confound and kill
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.
While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill:
When more is felt than one hath power to tell. 1340
So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:
'O comfort-killing Night, image of hell!
For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,
'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell;
And that deep torture may be call'd a hell
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell!
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell;
Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!--
Have batter'd down her consecrated wall,
Her immortality, and made her thrall
For one's offence why should so many fall,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
And therein so ensconced his secret evil,
And talk'd of virtue: O unlook'd-for evil,
For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil;
Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.
This earthly saint, adored by this devil,
And the dire thought of his committed evil
No more than wax shall be accounted evil
But, like a constant and confirmed devil,
When virtue is profaned in such a devil!
Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil.
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfil,
And swear I found you where you did fulfil
And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,
To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel,
And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel;
Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.'
To living death and pain perpetual:
To plague a private sin in general? 1535
people were so moved, that with one consent and a general
He takes for accidental things of trial;
He in the worst sense construes their denial:
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
I sue for exiled majesty's repeal;
Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,
'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook,
She would have said 'can lurk in such a look;'
Where subjects' eyes do learn, do read, do look.
'To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took:
For princes are the glass, the school, the book,
And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek,
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk
Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week?
'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?
Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick 830
Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick;
And let thy misty vapours march so thick,
I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack!
'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack;
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black:
Coming from thee, I could not put him back,
O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,
But now the mindful messenger, come back,
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break
Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak;
My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;
By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak
This bastard graff shall never come to growth:
Thou smother'st honesty, thou murder'st troth;
By holy human law, and common troth,
The stained taste of violated troth; 1110
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth,
But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth 1090
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth:
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth:
His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
Lucrece at Collatium. The same night he treacherously stealeth
Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:
'Thou makest the vestal violate her oath;
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.
Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth
Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth, 1725
'Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth
Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth:
All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth;
Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath,
To flatter thee with an infringed oath;
My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath,
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.
Till manly shame bids him possess his breath
Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath;
To make more vent for passage of her breath;
Have heard the cause of my untimely death;
And live to be revenged on her death.
To find some desperate instrument of death:
Showing life's triumph in the map of death,
So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.
With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,
The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
The more she thought he spied in her some blemish. 1410
This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch,
The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch:
Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch:
But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,
And leaves it to be master'd by his young;
In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,
And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong;
By that her death, to do her husband wrong: 1315
Assail'd by night with circumstances strong
Their father was too weak, and they too strong,
Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng
supper every one commended the virtues of his own wife: among
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long;
And my laments would be drawn out too long,
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.
Such danger to resistance did belong,
Hateful it is; there is no hate in loving:
As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,
'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living, 1765
Braving compare, disdainfully did sting
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.
The worst is but denial and reproving:
My will is strong, past reason's weak removing.
By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving.'
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting:
Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.
I think the honey guarded with a sting;
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting,
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting,
His taste delicious, in digestion souring,
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring!
'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring; 920
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring,
Tarquinius being inflamed with Lucrece' beauty, yet smothering
'I see what crosses my attempt will bring;
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping;
Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping: 1140
Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining:
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping:
Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,
Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining:
The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining;
raining?
Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.
And both she thinks too long with her remaining:
No penetrable entrance to her plaining:
And time doth weary time with her complaining.
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining: 1320
Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining;
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing;
No cause, but company, of her drops spilling:
Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling: 1285
'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king;
Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking;
Suggested this proud issue of a king;
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
What terror or 'tis! but she, in worser taking,
What darest thou not when once thou art a king?
'The baser is he, coming from a king,
Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king;
For kings like gods should govern everything.
Pain pays the income of each precious thing;
O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing
But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing 1055
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,
In me moe woes than words are now depending;
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending;
Where no excuse can give the fault amending: 1665
Hindering their present fall by this dividing;
In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding,
Which blows these pitchy vapours from their bidding,
the principal men of the army meeting one evening at the tent of
intending, by their secret and sudden arrival, to make trial of
Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief! 940
So, I commend me from our house in grief: 1360
My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.'
Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.
Or one encompass'd with a winding maze,
As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze, 1200
But eagles gazed upon with every eye.
And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye
Save something too much wonder of his eye,
The scornful mark of every open eye;
Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye;
Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye;
His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye
Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye;
My heart shall never countermand mine eye:
And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,
And round about her tear-stained eye
Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.
Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe
Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.'
When they in thee the like offences prove:
If but for fear of this, thy will remove;
By her untimely tears, her husband's love,
But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love:
She conjures him by high almighty Jove,
'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive,
If they surcease to be that should survive.
Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,
'O, that is gone for which I sought to live,
And time to see one that by alms doth live
And leave the faltering feeble souls alive?
The old bees die, the young possess their hive: 1820
Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.
To clear this spot by death, at least I give
Let him have time against himself to rave,
O foul dishonour to my household's grave!
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave:
Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave,
A martial man to be soft fancy's slave!
'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;
Let him have time to live a loathed slave, 1035
As slanderous death's-man to so base a slave?
Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.
For who so base would such an office have
True valour still a true respect should have;
That blushing red no guilty instance gave,
Of present death, and shame that might ensue
The sight which makes supposed terror true.
Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue,
Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue,--
Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue;
I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue;
To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.
To give her so much grief and not a tongue.
But no perfection is so absolute,
That some impurity doth not pollute. 905
He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute
Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.'
Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste:
To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste,
Is not inured; return again in haste;
'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.'
Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.'
Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.
That my posterity, shamed with the note
To cipher me how fondly I did dote;
He thence departs a heavy convertite;
This bateless edge on his keen appetite;
Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.
Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite
When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite:
On the green coverlet; whose perfect white
Argued by beauty's red and virtue's white
In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white,
Virtue would stain that o'er with silver white.
When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white.
To praise the clear unmatched red and white
Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state;
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state:
'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state'--
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,
acclamation the Tarquins were all exiled, and the state
For that he colour'd with his high estate,
Here pale with fear he doth premeditate
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate:
Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate,
Melt at my tears, and be compassionate!
That nothing in him seem'd inordinate,
In the possession of his beauteous mate;
That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate;
Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate,
Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate.
Soft pity enters at an iron gate.
But some untimely thought did instigate
For me, I am the mistress of my fate, 1120
And in his inward mind he doth debate
'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse!
Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse.
Betray'd the hours thou gavest me to repose,
Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,
Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse,
He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;
and finding Lucrece attired in mourning habit, demanded the cause
The painter was no god to lend her those;
His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those:
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, 1755
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense;
And with my trespass never will dispense,
Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?
Wherein deep policy did him disguise;
O, how her fear did make her colour rise!
Now serves the season that they may surprise
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
What following sorrow may on this arise:
'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth be, 'arise:
Then looking scornfully, he doth despise
Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,
Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;
Extinguishing his conduct in this case;
Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case:
Then my digression is so vile, so base,
To accessary yieldings, but still pure
Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.' 1710
He doth again repeat, and that they swore.
But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store,
By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store,
Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.
'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.'
Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more; 1840
That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more.
Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;
'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore; 1165
Throng her inventions, which shall go before.
And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.
And that deep vow, which Brutus made before,
'Now, by the Capitol that we adore,
Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
Till like a jade Self-will himself doth tire.
Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire:
At length address'd to answer his desire,
That to his borrow'd bed he make retire,
'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire,
So Lucrece must I force to my desire.'
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
But if the like the snow-white swan desire,
And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.
Had doting Priam cheque'd his son's desire,
Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire,
His true respect will prison false desire,
Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,
Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.
Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire
'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire, 1060
Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire, 1655
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire
'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,
Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.'
'Think but how vile a spectacle it were,
A thousand lamentable objects there, 1425
For much imaginary work was there;
Night-wandering weasels shriek to see him there;
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;
He makes excuses for his being there:
No rightful plea might plead for justice there: 1700
Yet save that labour, for I have them here.
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here;
Thou nursest all and murder'st all that are: 980
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are
And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare;
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe:
'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
With head declined, and voice damm'd up with woe,
Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe.
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:
A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe; 1560
Become the public plague of many moe? 1530
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,
To sound a parley to his heartless foe;
To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.
Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe;
And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe,
Rather than triumph in so false a foe.
To strike a poor unseasonable doe.
And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,
Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,
Will slay the other and be nurse to none.
Let sin, alone committed, light alone
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.
'Why should the private pleasure of some one
another to the camp for Collatine. They came, the one
And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done
With your uncleanness that which is divine;
That eye which him beholds, as more divine,
When the one pure, the other made divine? 1215
'Yet die I will not till my Collatine
And only must be wail'd by Collatine.' 1850
And in the self-same seat sits Collatine:
As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.
Speaking to those that came with Collatine, 1740
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?
How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine. 870
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine:
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
Ay me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine,
But I alone alone must sit and pine,
That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.'
He weeps for her, for she was only mine,
For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
That is as clear from this attaint of mine
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, 1230
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;
Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
Unto a view so false will not incline;
Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine,
To darken her whose light excelleth thine:
Some present speed to come and visit me.
'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
By foul enforcement might be done to me,
My Collatine would else have come to me
That guides this hand to give this wound to me.'
Many she sees where cares have carved some,
To all sins past, and all that are to come,
To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,
And never be forgot in mighty Rome 1695
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,
So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,
'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me, 885
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me:
To all the host of heaven I complain me,
'How may this forced stain be wiped from me?
Have time to wail th' abusing of his time. 1045
Make war against proportion'd course of time; 825
'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time,
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,
And ever let his unrecalling crime
O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!
'Where now I have no one to blush with me,
To those that live, and think no shame of me. 1255
Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me.
Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me:
'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me:
Myself a weakling; do not then ensnare me:
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me:
From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me
Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me 1735
Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me 985
Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.
Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same,
Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name.
To privilege dishonour in thy name?
And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; 865
And decks with praises Collatine's high name,
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,
Authority for sin, warrant for blame,
Imagine every eye beholds their blame; 1395
With men's abuses: those proud lords, to blame, 1310
Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?
Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame!
Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame;
Honour thyself to rid me of this shame:
When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame;
Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.
'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?
This dying virtue, this surviving shame,
And entertain my love; else lasting shame 1680
Dim register and notary of shame!
For Lucrece thought he blush'd to her see shame:
He stories to her ears her husband's fame,
Which of them both should underprop her fame:
That kings might be espoused to more fame,
But if I live, thou livest in my defame:
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,
Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame!
But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.
And softly cried 'Awake, thou Roman dame,
Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame,
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame, 1085
With shining falchion in my chamber came
If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole
'It cannot be,' quoth she,'that so much guile'-- 1585
But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while,
Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,
That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale:
Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.'
That even for anger makes the lily pale,
Left there round turrets destitute and pale.
As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,
Under that colour am I come to scale
Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
'O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke, 850
Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake.
My resolution, husband, do thou take;
The shame that from them no device can take,
And every one to rest themselves betake,
'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake,
And for himself himself be must forsake:
'O, what excuse can my invention make,
Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
'This brief abridgement of my will I make:
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake,
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.
Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die;
But coward-like with trembling terror die.
The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.
And therefore now I need not fear to die.
'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die!
Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die. 1190
his passions for the present, departed with the rest back to the
into her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the
bitter invective against the tyranny of the king: wherewith the
they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the
She utters this, 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he,
'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she,
The protestation stops. 'O, speak, ' quoth she,
'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine,' quoth he,
and other noblemen of Rome, to besiege Ardea. During which siege
And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,
Even so this pattern of the worn-out age
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage:
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage;
If in thy hope thou darest do such outrage,
As life for honour in fell battle's rage;
Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage
One poor retiring minute in an age
'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage.
This siege that hath engirt his marriage,
Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage.
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
That one for all, or all for one we gage;
'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,
Respect and reason, wait on wrinkled age!
'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife,
Answer'd their cries, 'my daughter' and 'my wife.'
Might have excuse to work upon his wife,
whom Collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity of his wife
Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.
But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife:
We will revenge the death of this true wife.'
Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife:
The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife;
This forced league doth force a further strife;
As if between them twain there were no strife,
Then son and father weep with equal strife
As in revenge or quittal of such strife:
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,
Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife 1235
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife:
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
'O,' quoth Lucretius,' I did give that life
Some happy mean to end a hapless life.
In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life:
But that life lived in death, and death in life.
But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,
The aim of all is but to nurse the life
The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece' life,
'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life;
If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see--
But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, 1135
'They think not but that every eye can see
Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see
From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free. 1675
'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree?
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee:
'Lucrece,' quoth he,'this night I must enjoy thee:
When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee.
'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee,
The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?
Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee:
I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee 1685
Thy father die, and not thy father thee!
Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee;
No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee:
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee;
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
For if I die, my honour lives in thee;
'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee:
'When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee,
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee:
They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee,
My honour lost, and I, a drone-like bee,
And with his knee the door he opens wide.
And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide
'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!
As through an arch the violent roaring tide
'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide
Circles her body in on every side, 1790
Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side,
Then Collatine again, by Lucrece' side,
Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side,
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride:
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride 1720
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, 1860
The lesser thing should not the greater hide;
'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
Where thou with patience must my will abide;
And blood untainted still doth red abide, 1800
Beauty itself doth of itself persuade
That all the faults which in thy reign are made 855
What needeth then apologies be made,
This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade,
He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence;
Till after a deep groan--'Tarquin from hence?'
Which being done with speedy diligence,
'The more to blame my sluggard negligence: 1330
He scowls and hates himself for his offence;
And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence:
'What is the quality of mine offence,
Till life to death acquit my forced offence.
My low-declined honour to advance?
Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance?
Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance,
Met far from home, wondering each other's chance.
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice; 1460
As if some mermaid did their ears entice,
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice;
More feeling-painful: let it then suffice 1730
The Rape of Lucrece
At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece. 1420
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace,
Immodestly lies martyr'd with disgrace!
'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace!
Which to her oratory adds more grace.
The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace,
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,
And counterfeits to die with her a space;
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;
She puts the period often from his place;
The murderous knife, and, as it left the place,
Through little vents and crannies of the place
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place:
That it will live engraven in my face.
Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face,
Let not the jealous Day behold that face
Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face, 880
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face;
About the mourning and congealed face 1795
By whose example thou revenged mayest be. 1245
So am I now: O no, that cannot be; 1100
And therefore would they still in darkness be,
Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.'
after he had caused his own father-in-law Servius Tullius to be
So that in venturing ill we leave to be
The lechers in their deed: this act will be
And therefore still in night would cloister'd be.
For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be:
And all my fame that lives disbursed be
'But tell me, girl, when went'--and there she stay'd
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd.
The coward fights and will not be dismay'd.
And when his gaudy banner is display'd,
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix'd,
Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix'd
As heaven, it seem'd, to kiss the turrets bow'd.
Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd; 935
Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd!
And makest fair reputation but a bawd.
Which the conceited painter drew so proud,
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?
'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud:
Thou black'st reproach against long-living laud,
The moon being clouded presently is miss'd,
May feel her heart-poor citizen!--distress'd,
Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd:
And then against my heart he sets his sword,
I should not live to speak another word;
At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord 1355
Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t' afford--
So should my shame still rest upon record,
Each one by him enforced, retires his ward;
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard:
The threshold grates the door to have him heard;
Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood
That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,
Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood: 1325
And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,
Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood.
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood. 1080
If all these pretty ills shall change thy good,
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;
The remedy indeed to do me good
If tears could help, mine own would do me good.
He ten times pines that pines beholding food;
Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound;
And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound,
'Poor instrument,' quoth she,'without a sound, 1515
She throws her eyes about the painting round, 1550
My soul and body to the skies and ground; 1250
My shame be his that did my fame confound;
At last she sees a wretched image bound,
Those that much covet are with gain so fond,
They scatter and unloose it from their bond,
And he the burden of a guilty mind.
Immaculate and spotless is my mind;
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind:
To jump up higher seem'd, to mock the mind. 1465
But such a face should bear a wicked mind.
Some purer chest to close so pure a mind.
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
She bears the load of lust he left behind,
Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind,
The scalps of many, almost hid behind,
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
Or at the least this refuge let me find; 1705
And turn'd it thus,' It cannot be, I find, 1590
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd,
And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd.
By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd,
And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd?
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd?
Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd,
And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd 1890
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd?
The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? 950
'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend:
'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend,
But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
A little harm done to a great good end
Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand
A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,
Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand? 1650
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;
At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
Making such sober action with his hand,
One justly weeps; the other takes in hand
Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand,
revenge, revealed the actor, and whole manner of his dealing, and
camp; from whence he shortly after privily withdrew himself, and
Lucretia. In that pleasant humour they posted to Rome; and
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band,
Their face their manners most expressly told:
To have their unseen sin remain untold;
To see sad sights moves more than hear them told;
'O, peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told,
Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old!
These contraries such unity do hold,
The same disgrace which they themselves behold;
Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,
The heavy motion that it doth behold,
Of physiognomy might one behold!
As shaming any eye should thee behold,
'Poor broken glass, I often did behold
'The aged man that coffers-up his gold
Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold:
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
Will we find out; and there we will unfold
But now that fresh fair mirror, dim and old,
O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold,
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,
'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,
Only to flatter fools and make them bold: 1610
Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd
Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd,
'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd 1855
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd
Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.'
But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd:
Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd.
I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.'
In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigor roll'd;
But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd,
To find a face where all distress is stell'd. 1495
Continuance tames the one; the other wild,
To tame the unicorn and lion wild,
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild;
Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild
'Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child,
True grief is fond and testy as a child, 1145
To make the child a man, the man a child, 1005
Which virtue gave the golden age to gild
And to their hope they such odd action yield,
The coward captive vanquished doth yield
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;
Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield;
Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field,
From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field:
When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field,
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd,
'And how her hand, in my hand being lock'd
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid:
Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid, 1835
But she, that yet her sad task hath not said, 1750
As well to hear as grant what he hath said.
That no man could distinguish what he said.
He gratis comes; and thou art well appaid 965
With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid, 1265
'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid,
This Plot of death when sadly she had laid,
Each present lord began to promise aid,
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeath'd
In her the painter had anatomized
When with like semblance it is sympathized.
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed:
That two red fires in both their faces blazed; 1405
And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed;
Within whose face beauty and virtue strived
When at Collatium this false lord arrived,
'That life was mine which thou hast here deprived.
Thou wast not to this end from me derived.
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived? 1805
The branches of another root are rotted,
For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted:
And undeserved reproach to him allotted 875
Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted,
'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted,
What could he see but mightily he noted?
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted
'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted.
As if with grief or travail he had fainted,
The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;
For lawful policy remains enacted.
This picture she advisedly perused,
Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused; 1580
And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.
Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed,
Though death be adjunct, there's no death supposed.
That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;
And when great treasure is the meed proposed,
But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.
Her cheeks with chaps and wrinkles were disguised;
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;
By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased. 1885
And him by oath they truly honoured.
That wounds my body so dishonoured.
To think their dolour others have endured.
It easeth some, though none it ever cured,
Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red,
And in his will his wilful eye he tired.
What did he note but strongly he desired?
With more than admiration he admired
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and red;
By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred;
To eat up errors by opinion bred,
So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred;
For, after supper, long he questioned
That was not forced; that never was inclined
And what wrong else may be imagined
Stood for the whole to be imagined.
By reprobate desire thus madly led,
But beauty, in that white intituled,
By their high treason is his heart misled;
To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled,
To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled 1595
With outward honesty, but yet defiled
Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled,
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried;
Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.
In a pure compound; being so applied,
That she concludes the picture was belied.
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
His venom in effect is purified.
Blushing at that which is so putrified.
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;
His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
O, had they in that darksome prison died!
Of that polluted prison where it breathed:
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed: 1775
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,
That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed.
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.
Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed?
Till Lucrece' father, that beholds her bleed,
Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed,
That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.
Let fair humanity abhor the deed
I know repentant tears ensue the deed,
When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?
The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;
All pure effects, and doth so far proceed,
With such black payment as thou hast pretended;
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended;
End thy ill aim before thy shoot be ended;
By this, lamenting Philomel had ended 1130
And solemn night with slow sad gait descended
True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed
That through the length of times he stands disgraced:
Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced,
Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced;
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed 1670
For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed,
His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.
The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed.
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.
O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!
That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.
At his own shadow let the thief run mad,
not requiring or staying for the people's suffrages, had
Such sweet observance in this work was had,
That dying fear through all her body spread;
Is madly toss'd between desire and dread;
Where thou was wont to rest thy weary head;
Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head,
Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head:
He pens her piteous clamours in her head;
Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.
A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead.
And who cannot abuse a body dead?
But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
The one will live, the other being dead:
'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb:
'You mocking-birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb
the people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,
The Argument
Lucius Tarquinius, for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus,
after he had caused his own father-in-law Servius Tullius to be
cruelly murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs,
not requiring or staying for the people's suffrages, had
possessed himself of the kingdom, went, accompanied with his sons
and other noblemen of Rome, to besiege Ardea. During which siege
the principal men of the army meeting one evening at the tent of
Sextus Tarquinius, the king's son, in their discourses after
supper every one commended the virtues of his own wife: among
whom Collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity of his wife
Lucretia. In that pleasant humour they posted to Rome; and
intending, by their secret and sudden arrival, to make trial of
that which every one had before avouched, only Collatinus finds
his wife, though it were late in the night, spinning amongst her
maids: the other ladies were all found dancing and revelling, or
in several disports. Whereupon the noblemen yielded Collatinus
the victory, and his wife the fame. At that time Sextus
Tarquinius being inflamed with Lucrece' beauty, yet smothering
his passions for the present, departed with the rest back to the
camp; from whence he shortly after privily withdrew himself, and
was, according to his estate, royally entertained and lodged by
Lucrece at Collatium. The same night he treacherously stealeth
into her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the
morning speedeth away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight,
hastily dispatcheth messengers, one to Rome for her father,
another to the camp for Collatine. They came, the one
accompanied with Junius Brutus, the other with Publius Valerius;
and finding Lucrece attired in mourning habit, demanded the cause
of her sorrow. She, first taking an oath of them for her
revenge, revealed the actor, and whole manner of his dealing, and
withal suddenly stabbed herself. Which done, with one consent
they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the
Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted
the people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a
bitter invective against the tyranny of the king: wherewith the
people were so moved, that with one consent and a general
acclamation the Tarquins were all exiled, and the state
government changed from kings to consuls.

The Rape of Lucrece
From the besieged Ardea all in post,
Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire
Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire
And girdle with embracing flames the waist
Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.

Haply that name of 'chaste' unhappily set
This bateless edge on his keen appetite;
When Collatine unwisely did not let
To praise the clear unmatched red and white
Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight,
Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties,
With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.

For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent,
Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state;
What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
In the possession of his beauteous mate;
Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate,
That kings might be espoused to more fame,
But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.

O happiness enjoy'd but of a few!
And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done
As is the morning's silver-melting dew
Against the golden splendor of the sun!
An expired date, cancell'd ere well begun:
Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms,
Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms.

Beauty itself doth of itself persuade
The eyes of men without an orator;
What needeth then apologies be made,
To set forth that which is so singular?
Or why is Collatine the publisher
Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown
From thievish ears, because it is his own?

Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty
Suggested this proud issue of a king;
For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be:
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,
Braving compare, disdainfully did sting
His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt
That golden hap which their superiors want.

But some untimely thought did instigate
His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those:
His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,
Neglected all, with swift intent he goes
To quench the coal which in his liver glows.
O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold,
Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old!

When at Collatium this false lord arrived,
Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame,
Within whose face beauty and virtue strived
Which of them both should underprop her fame:
When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame;
When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
Virtue would stain that o'er with silver white.

But beauty, in that white intituled,
From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field:
Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red,
Which virtue gave the golden age to gild
Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield;
Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white.

This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen,
Argued by beauty's red and virtue's white
Of either's colour was the other queen,
Proving from world's minority their right:
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;
The sovereignty of either being so great,
That oft they interchange each other's seat.

Their silent war of lilies and of roses,
Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field,
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;
Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd,
The coward captive vanquished doth yield
To those two armies that would let him go,
Rather than triumph in so false a foe.

Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue,--
The niggard prodigal that praised her so,--
In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show:
Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe
Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,
In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.

This earthly saint, adored by this devil,
Little suspecteth the false worshipper;
For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil;
Birds never limed no secret bushes fear:
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer
And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd:

For that he colour'd with his high estate,
Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty;
That nothing in him seem'd inordinate,
Save something too much wonder of his eye,
Which, having all, all could not satisfy;
But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store,
That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more.

But she, that never coped with stranger eyes,
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies
Writ in the glassy margents of such books:
She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks;
Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
More than his eyes were open'd to the light.

He stories to her ears her husband's fame,
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;
And decks with praises Collatine's high name,
Made glorious by his manly chivalry
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory:
Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express,
And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.

Far from the purpose of his coming hither,
He makes excuses for his being there:
No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather
Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear;
Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear,
Upon the world dim darkness doth display,
And in her vaulty prison stows the Day.

For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
Intending weariness with heavy spright;
For, after supper, long he questioned
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:
Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight;
And every one to rest themselves betake,
Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake.

As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving
The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining;
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,
Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining:
Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining;
And when great treasure is the meed proposed,
Though death be adjunct, there's no death supposed.

Those that much covet are with gain so fond,
For what they have not, that which they possess
They scatter and unloose it from their bond,
And so, by hoping more, they have but less;
Or, gaining more, the profit of excess
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.

The aim of all is but to nurse the life
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,
That one for all, or all for one we gage;
As life for honour in fell battle's rage;
Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost
The death of all, and all together lost.

So that in venturing ill we leave to be
The things we are for that which we expect;
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
In having much, torments us with defect
Of that we have: so then we do neglect
The thing we have; and, all for want of wit,
Make something nothing by augmenting it.

Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;
And for himself himself be must forsake:
Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
When he himself himself confounds, betrays
To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?

Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes:
No comfortable star did lend his light,
No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries;
Now serves the season that they may surprise
The silly lambs: pure thoughts are dead and still,
While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.

And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed,
Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm;
Is madly toss'd between desire and dread;
Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm;
But honest fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm,
Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.

His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,
That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye;
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly,
'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,
So Lucrece must I force to my desire.'

Here pale with fear he doth premeditate
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
And in his inward mind he doth debate
What following sorrow may on this arise:
Then looking scornfully, he doth despise
His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust,
And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:

'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not
To darken her whose light excelleth thine:
And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot
With your uncleanness that which is divine;
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine:
Let fair humanity abhor the deed
That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed.

'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!
O foul dishonour to my household's grave!
O impious act, including all foul harms!
A martial man to be soft fancy's slave!
True valour still a true respect should have;
Then my digression is so vile, so base,
That it will live engraven in my face.

'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive,
And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;
Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,
To cipher me how fondly I did dote;
That my posterity, shamed with the note
Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin
To wish that I their father had not bin.

'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.
Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week?
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?

'If Collatinus dream of my intent,
Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
This siege that hath engirt his marriage,
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
This dying virtue, this surviving shame,
Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?

'O, what excuse can my invention make,
When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake,
Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed?
The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;
And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
But coward-like with trembling terror die.

'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire,
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
Might have excuse to work upon his wife,
As in revenge or quittal of such strife:
But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.

'Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known:
Hateful it is; there is no hate in loving:
I'll beg her love; but she is own:
The worst is but denial and reproving:
My will is strong, past reason's weak removing.
Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw
Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.'

Thus, graceless, holds he disputation
'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,
And with good thoughts make dispensation,
Urging the worser sense for vantage still;
Which in a moment doth confound and kill
All pure effects, and doth so far proceed,
That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.

Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand,
And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes,
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band,
Where her beloved Collatinus lies.
O, how her fear did make her colour rise!
First red as roses that on lawn we lay,
Then white as lawn, the roses took away.

'And how her hand, in my hand being lock'd
Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear!
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd,
Until her husband's welfare she did hear;
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer,
That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,
Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood.

'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?
All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth;
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;
Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth:
Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;
And when his gaudy banner is display'd,
The coward fights and will not be dismay'd.

'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die!
Respect and reason, wait on wrinkled age!
My heart shall never countermand mine eye:
Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage;
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage:
Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;
Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?'

As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear
Is almost choked by unresisted lust.
Away he steals with open listening ear,
Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust;
Both which, as servitors to the unjust,
So cross him with their opposite persuasion,
That now he vows a league, and now invasion.

Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
And in the self-same seat sits Collatine:
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;
That eye which him beholds, as more divine,
Unto a view so false will not incline;
But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
Which once corrupted takes the worser part;

And therein heartens up his servile powers,
Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show,
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;
And as their captain, so their pride doth grow,
Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.
By reprobate desire thus madly led,
The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed.

The locks between her chamber and his will,
Each one by him enforced, retires his ward;
But, as they open, they all rate his ill,
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard:
The threshold grates the door to have him heard;
Night-wandering weasels shriek to see him there;
They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.

As each unwilling portal yields him way,
Through little vents and crannies of the place
The wind wars with his torch to make him stay,
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
Extinguishing his conduct in this case;
But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,
Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch:

And being lighted, by the light he spies
Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks:
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
And griping it, the needle his finger pricks;
As who should say 'This glove to wanton tricks
Is not inured; return again in haste;
Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.'

But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;
He in the worst sense construes their denial:
The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him,
He takes for accidental things of trial;
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
Who with a lingering slay his course doth let,
Till every minute pays the hour his debt.

'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time,
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring,
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.
Pain pays the income of each precious thing;
Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands,
The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.'

Now is he come unto the chamber-door,
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,
Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing be sought.
So from himself impiety hath wrought,
That for his prey to pray he doth begin,
As if the heavens should countenance his sin.

But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,
Having solicited th' eternal power
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
Even there he starts: quoth he, 'I must deflower:
The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,
How can they then assist me in the act?

'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!
My will is back'd with resolution:
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried;
The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution;
Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution.
The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.'

This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch,
And with his knee the door he opens wide.
The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch:
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.

Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.
The curtains being close, about he walks,
Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head:
By their high treason is his heart misled;
Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon
To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.

Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;
Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
To wink, being blinded with a greater light:
Whether it is that she reflects so bright,
That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;
But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.

O, had they in that darksome prison died!
Then had they seen the period of their ill;
Then Collatine again, by Lucrece' side,
In his clear bed might have reposed still:
But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;
And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight
Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight.

Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Between whose hills her head entombed is:
Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies,
To be admired of lewd unhallow'd eyes.

Without the bed her other fair hand was,
On the green coverlet; whose perfect white
Show'd like an April daisy on the grass,
With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night.
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
Till they might open to adorn the day.

Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath;
O modest wantons! wanton modesty!
Showing life's triumph in the map of death,
And death's dim look in life's mortality:
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
As if between them twain there were no strife,
But that life lived in death, and death in life.

Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
And him by oath they truly honoured.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred;
Who, like a foul ursurper, went about
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.

What could he see but mightily he noted?
What did he note but strongly he desired?
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
And in his will his wilful eye he tired.
With more than admiration he admired
Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.

As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey,
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side,
His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins:

And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting,
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting:
Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.

His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;
Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
Left there round turrets destitute and pale.

They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
And fright her with confusion of their cries:
She, much amazed, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes,
Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd.

Imagine her as one in dead of night
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking;
What terror or 'tis! but she, in worser taking,
From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
The sight which makes supposed terror true.

Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears,
Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies;
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes:
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries;
Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.

His hand, that yet remains upon her breast,--
Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!--
May feel her heart-poor citizen!--distress'd,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
To make the breach and enter this sweet city.

First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin
To sound a parley to his heartless foe;
Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
Which he by dumb demeanor seeks to show;
But she with vehement prayers urgeth still
Under what colour he commits this ill.

Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face,
That even for anger makes the lily pale,
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace,
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale:
Under that colour am I come to scale
Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine,
For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.

'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,
Where thou with patience must my will abide;
My will that marks thee for my earth's delight,
Which I to conquer sought with all my might;
But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.

'I see what crosses my attempt will bring;
I know what thorns the growing rose defends;
I think the honey guarded with a sting;
All this beforehand counsel comprehends:
But will is deaf and hears no heedful friends;
Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,
And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty.

'I have debated, even in my soul,
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;
But nothing can affection's course control,
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.
I know repentant tears ensue the deed,
Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;
Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy.'

This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
Which, like a falcon towering in the skies,
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade,
Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies:
So under his insulting falchion lies
Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells
With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells.

'Lucrece,' quoth he,'this night I must enjoy thee:
If thou deny, then force must work my way,
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee:
That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay,
To kill thine honour with thy life's decay;
And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.

'So thy surviving husband shall remain
The scornful mark of every open eye;
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
Thy issue blurr'd with nameless bastardy:
And thou, the author of their obloquy,
Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes,
And sung by children in succeeding times.

'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend:
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;
A little harm done to a great good end
For lawful policy remains enacted.
The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted
In a pure compound; being so applied,
His venom in effect is purified.

'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake,
Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot
The shame that from them no device can take,
The blemish that will never be forgot;
Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour's blot:
For marks descried in men's nativity
Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.'

Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye
He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;
While she, the picture of pure piety,
Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws,
Pleads, in a wilderness where are no laws,
To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,
Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.

But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat,
In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding,
From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get,
Which blows these pitchy vapours from their bidding,
Hindering their present fall by this dividing;
So his unhallow'd haste her words delays,
And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.

Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally,
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth:
Her sad behavior feeds his vulture folly,
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth:
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
No penetrable entrance to her plaining:
Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.

Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix'd
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face;
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix'd,
Which to her oratory adds more grace.
She puts the period often from his place;
And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,
That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.

She conjures him by high almighty Jove,
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath,
By her untimely tears, her husband's love,
By holy human law, and common troth,
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
That to his borrow'd bed he make retire,
And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.

Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality
With such black payment as thou hast pretended;
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee;
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended;
End thy ill aim before thy shoot be ended;
He is no woodman that doth bend his bow
To strike a poor unseasonable doe.

'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me:
Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me:
Myself a weakling; do not then ensnare me:
Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me.
My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee:
If ever man were moved with woman moans,
Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans:

'All which together, like a troubled ocean,
Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart,
To soften it with their continual motion;
For stones dissolved to water do convert.
O, if no harder than a stone thou art,
Melt at my tears, and be compassionate!
Soft pity enters at an iron gate.

'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee:
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?
To all the host of heaven I complain me,
Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name.
Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same,
Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king;
For kings like gods should govern everything.

'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring!
If in thy hope thou darest do such outrage,
What darest thou not when once thou art a king?
O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing
From vassal actors can be wiped away;
Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.

'This deed will make thee only loved for fear;
But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love:
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
When they in thee the like offences prove:
If but for fear of this, thy will remove;
For princes are the glass, the school, the book,
Where subjects' eyes do learn, do read, do look.

'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?
Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern
Authority for sin, warrant for blame,
To privilege dishonour in thy name?
Thou black'st reproach against long-living laud,
And makest fair reputation but a bawd.

'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee,
From a pure heart command thy rebel will:
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfil,
When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul sin may say,
He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way?

'Think but how vile a spectacle it were,
To view thy present trespass in another.
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear;
Their own transgressions partially they smother:
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
O, how are they wrapp'd in with infamies
That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!

'To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal,
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier:
I sue for exiled majesty's repeal;
Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire:
His true respect will prison false desire,
And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,
That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.'

'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
And with the wind in greater fury fret:
The petty streams that pay a daily debt
To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste
Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.'

'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king;
And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood
Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.
If all these pretty ills shall change thy good,
Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed,
And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.

'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave:
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride:
The lesser thing should not the greater hide;
The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot,
But low shrubs wither at the cedar's root.

'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state'--
No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee:
Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate,
Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee;
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee
Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
To be thy partner in this shameful doom.'

This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
For light and lust are deadly enemies:
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.
The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries;
Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd
Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold:

For with the nightly linen that she wears
He pens her piteous clamours in her head;
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!
The spots whereof could weeping purify,
Her tears should drop on them perpetually.

But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,
And he hath won what he would lose again:
This forced league doth force a further strife;
This momentary joy breeds months of pain;
This hot desire converts to cold disdain:
Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.

Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk
The prey wherein by nature they delight;
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night:
His taste delicious, in digestion souring,
Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.

O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit
Can comprehend in still imagination!
Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt,
Ere he can see his own abomination.
While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation
Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire,
Till like a jade Self-will himself doth tire.

And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek,
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,
Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,
Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case:
The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace,
For there it revels; and when that decays,
The guilty rebel for remission prays.

So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;
For now against himself he sounds this doom,
That through the length of times he stands disgraced:
Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced;
To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
To ask the spotted princess how she fares.

She says, her subjects with foul insurrection
Have batter'd down her consecrated wall,
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
Her immortality, and made her thrall
To living death and pain perpetual:
Which in her prescience she controlled still,
But her foresight could not forestall their will.

Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,
A captive victor that hath lost in gain;
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;
Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain.
She bears the load of lust he left behind,
And he the burden of a guilty mind.

He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;
He scowls and hates himself for his offence;
She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear;
He faintly flies, sneaking with guilty fear;
She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;
He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loathed delight.

He thence departs a heavy convertite;
She there remains a hopeless castaway;
He in his speed looks for the morning light;
She prays she never may behold the day,
'For day,' quoth she, 'nights scapes doth open lay,
And my true eyes have never practised how
To cloak offences with a cunning brow.

'They think not but that every eye can see
The same disgrace which they themselves behold;
And therefore would they still in darkness be,
To have their unseen sin remain untold;
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,
Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.'

Here she exclaims against repose and rest,
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
Some purer chest to close so pure a mind.
Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite
Against the unseen secrecy of night:

'O comfort-killing Night, image of hell!
Dim register and notary of shame!
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell!
Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame!
Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame!
Grim cave of death! whispering conspirator
With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!

'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night!
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,
Make war against proportion'd course of time; 825
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb
His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.

'With rotten damps ravish the morning air;
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick 830
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick;
And let thy misty vapours march so thick,
That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light
May set at noon and make perpetual night. 835

'Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child,
The silver-shining queen he would distain;
Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled,
Through Night's black bosom should not peep again:
So should I have co-partners in my pain; 840
And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,
As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage.

'Where now I have no one to blush with me,
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
To mask their brows and hide their infamy; 845
But I alone alone must sit and pine,
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,
Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.

'O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke, 850
Let not the jealous Day behold that face
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
Immodestly lies martyr'd with disgrace!
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
That all the faults which in thy reign are made 855
May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!

'Make me not object to the tell-tale Day!
The light will show, character'd in my brow,
The story of sweet chastity's decay,
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow: 860
Yea the illiterate, that know not how
To cipher what is writ in learned books,
Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.

'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story,
And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; 865
The orator, to deck his oratory,
Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame;
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,
Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine. 870

'Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted:
If that be made a theme for disputation,
The branches of another root are rotted,
And undeserved reproach to him allotted 875
That is as clear from this attaint of mine
As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.

'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace!
O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar!
Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face, 880
And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar,
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,
Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!

'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me, 885
From me by strong assault it is bereft.
My honour lost, and I, a drone-like bee,
Have no perfection of my summer left,
But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft:
In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept, 890
And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept.

'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack;
Yet for thy honour did I entertain him;
Coming from thee, I could not put him back,
For it had been dishonour to disdain him: 895
Besides, of weariness he did complain him,
And talk'd of virtue: O unlook'd-for evil,
When virtue is profaned in such a devil!

'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? 900
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Or kings be breakers of their own behests?
But no perfection is so absolute,
That some impurity doth not pollute. 905

'The aged man that coffers-up his gold
Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits;
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,
And useless barns the harvest of his wits; 910
Having no other pleasure of his gain
But torment that it cannot cure his pain.

'So then he hath it when he cannot use it,
And leaves it to be master'd by his young;
Who in their pride do presently abuse it: 915
Their father was too weak, and they too strong,
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.
The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours
Even in the moment that we call them ours.

'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring; 920
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;
What virtue breeds iniquity devours:
We have no good that we can say is ours,
But ill-annexed Opportunity 925
Or kills his life or else his quality.

'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great!
'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason:
Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get;
Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season; 930
'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason;
And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.

'Thou makest the vestal violate her oath;
Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd; 935
Thou smother'st honesty, thou murder'st troth;
Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd!
Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud:
Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief! 940

'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,
Thy private feasting to a public fast,
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,
Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste:
Thy violent vanities can never last. 945
How comes it then, vile Opportunity,
Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?

'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend,
And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd?
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? 950
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd?
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd?
The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
But they ne'er meet with Opportunity.

'The patient dies while the physician sleeps; 955
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;
Advice is sporting while infection breeds:
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds:
Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages, 960
Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.

'When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee,
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid:
They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee,
He gratis comes; and thou art well appaid 965
As well to hear as grant what he hath said.
My Collatine would else have come to me
When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee.

Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,
Guilty of perjury and subornation, 970
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift,
Guilty of incest, that abomination;
An accessary by thine inclination
To all sins past, and all that are to come,
From the creation to the general doom. 975

'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night,
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare;
Thou nursest all and murder'st all that are: 980
O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!
Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.

'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity,
Betray'd the hours thou gavest me to repose,
Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me 985
To endless date of never-ending woes?
Time's office is to fine the hate of foes;
To eat up errors by opinion bred,
Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.

'Time's glory is to calm contending kings, 990
To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To wake the morn and sentinel the night,
To wrong the wronger till he render right,
To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours, 995
And smear with dust their glittering golden towers;

'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
To blot old books and alter their contents,
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, 1000
To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs,
To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel,
And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel;

'To show the beldam daughters of her daughter,
To make the child a man, the man a child, 1005
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,
To tame the unicorn and lion wild,
To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled,
To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,
And waste huge stones with little water drops. 1010

'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
Unless thou couldst return to make amends?
One poor retiring minute in an age
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends: 1015
O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,
I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack!

'Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity,
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight:
Devise extremes beyond extremity, 1020
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night:
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright;
And the dire thought of his committed evil
Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.

'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, 1025
Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
To make him moan; but pity not his moans:
Stone him with harden'd hearts harder than stones;
And let mild women to him lose their mildness, 1030
Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.

'Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
Let him have time against himself to rave,
Let him have time of Time's help to despair,
Let him have time to live a loathed slave, 1035
Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave,
And time to see one that by alms doth live
Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.

'Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
And merry fools to mock at him resort; 1040
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
His time of folly and his time of sport;
And ever let his unrecalling crime
Have time to wail th' abusing of his time. 1045

'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,
Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill!
At his own shadow let the thief run mad,
Himself himself seek every hour to kill!
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill; 1050
For who so base would such an office have
As slanderous death's-man to so base a slave?

'The baser is he, coming from a king,
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate:
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing 1055
That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate;
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
The moon being clouded presently is miss'd,
But little stars may hide them when they list.

'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire, 1060
And unperceived fly with the filth away;
But if the like the snow-white swan desire,
The stain upon his silver down will stay.
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day:
Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, 1065
But eagles gazed upon with every eye.

'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools!
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; 1070
To trembling clients be you mediators:
For me, I force not argument a straw,
Since that my case is past the help of law.

'In vain I rail at Opportunity,
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night; 1075
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite:
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.
The remedy indeed to do me good
Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood. 1080

'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree?
Honour thyself to rid me of this shame:
For if I die, my honour lives in thee;
But if I live, thou livest in my defame:
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame, 1085
And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe,
Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.'

This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth,
To find some desperate instrument of death:
But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth 1090
To make more vent for passage of her breath;
Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth
As smoke from AEtna, that in air consumes,
Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.

'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain 1095
Some happy mean to end a hapless life.
I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain,
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife:
But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife:
So am I now: O no, that cannot be; 1100
Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.

'O, that is gone for which I sought to live,
And therefore now I need not fear to die.
To clear this spot by death, at least I give
A badge of fame to slander's livery; 1105
A dying life to living infamy:
Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away,
To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!

'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know
The stained taste of violated troth; 1110
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
To flatter thee with an infringed oath;
This bastard graff shall never come to growth:
He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute
That thou art doting father of his fruit. 1115

'Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state:
But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought
Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate.
For me, I am the mistress of my fate, 1120
And with my trespass never will dispense,
Till life to death acquit my forced offence.

'I will not poison thee with my attaint,
Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses;
My sable ground of sin I will not paint, 1125
To hide the truth of this false night's abuses:
My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,
As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,
Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.'

By this, lamenting Philomel had ended 1130
The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow,
And solemn night with slow sad gait descended
To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow:
But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, 1135
And therefore still in night would cloister'd be.

Revealing day through every cranny spies,
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping;
To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes,
Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping: 1140
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping:
Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
For day hath nought to do what's done by night.'

Thus cavils she with every thing she sees:
True grief is fond and testy as a child, 1145
Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees:
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild;
Continuance tames the one; the other wild,
Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still,
With too much labour drowns for want of skill. 1150

So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
Holds disputation with each thing she views,
And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
No object but her passion's strength renews;
And as one shifts, another straight ensues: 1155
Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords.

The little birds that tune their morning's joy
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody:
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy; 1160
Sad souls are slain in merry company;
Grief best is pleased with grief's society:
True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed
When with like semblance it is sympathized.

'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore; 1165
He ten times pines that pines beholding food;
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,
Who being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows; 1170
Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.

'You mocking-birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb
Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts,
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb:
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; 1175
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests:
Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;
Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.

'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment,
Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair: 1180
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear,
And with deep groans the diapason bear;
For burden-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still,
While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill. 1185

'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part,
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,
To imitate thee well, against my heart
Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye;
Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die. 1190
These means, as frets upon an instrument,
Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.

'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day,
As shaming any eye should thee behold,
Some dark deep desert, seated from the way, 1195
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,
Will we find out; and there we will unfold
To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds:
Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.'

As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze, 1200
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Or one encompass'd with a winding maze,
That cannot tread the way out readily;
So with herself is she in mutiny,
To live or die which of the twain were better, 1205
When life is shamed, and death reproach's debtor.

'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack, what were it,
But with my body my poor soul's pollution?
They that lose half with greater patience bear it
Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion. 1210
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,
Will slay the other and be nurse to none.

'My body or my soul, which was the dearer,
When the one pure, the other made divine? 1215
Whose love of either to myself was nearer,
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?
Ay me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine,
His leaves will wither and his sap decay;
So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away. 1220

'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted,
Her mansion batter'd by the enemy;
Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted,
Grossly engirt with daring infamy:
Then let it not be call'd impiety, 1225
If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole
Through which I may convey this troubled soul.

'Yet die I will not till my Collatine
Have heard the cause of my untimely death;
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, 1230
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.
My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath,
Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,
And as his due writ in my testament.

'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife 1235
That wounds my body so dishonoured.
'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life;
The one will live, the other being dead:
So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred;
For in my death I murder shameful scorn: 1240
My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born.

'Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
My resolution, love, shall be thy boast,
By whose example thou revenged mayest be. 1245
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me:
Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,
And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so.

'This brief abridgement of my will I make:
My soul and body to the skies and ground; 1250
My resolution, husband, do thou take;
Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound;
My shame be his that did my fame confound;
And all my fame that lives disbursed be
To those that live, and think no shame of me. 1255

'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
My life's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it.
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say 'So be it:' 1260
Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee:
Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.'

This Plot of death when sadly she had laid,
And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid, 1265
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;
For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies.
Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so
As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.

Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow, 1270
With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty,
And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow,
For why her face wore sorrow's livery;
But durst not ask of her audaciously
Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, 1275
Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe.

But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,
Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye;
Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet
Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy 1280
Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky,
Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light,
Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.

A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling: 1285
One justly weeps; the other takes in hand
No cause, but company, of her drops spilling:
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing;
Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts,
And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts. 1290

For men have marble, women waxen, minds,
And therefore are they form'd as marble will;
The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds
Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill:
Then call them not the authors of their ill, 1295
No more than wax shall be accounted evil
Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil.

Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,
Lays open all the little worms that creep;
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain 1300
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep:
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep:
Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
Poor women's faces are their own fault's books.

No man inveigh against the wither'd flower, 1305
But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd:
Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour,
Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd
With men's abuses: those proud lords, to blame, 1310
Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.

The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,
Assail'd by night with circumstances strong
Of present death, and shame that might ensue
By that her death, to do her husband wrong: 1315
Such danger to resistance did belong,
That dying fear through all her body spread;
And who cannot abuse a body dead?

By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining: 1320
'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are
raining?
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,
Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood: 1325
If tears could help, mine own would do me good.

'But tell me, girl, when went'--and there she stay'd
Till after a deep groan--'Tarquin from hence?'
'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid,
'The more to blame my sluggard negligence: 1330
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense;
Myself was stirring ere the break of day,
And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.

'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,
She would request to know your heaviness.' 1335
'O, peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told,
The repetition cannot make it less;
For more it is than I can well express:
And that deep torture may be call'd a hell
When more is felt than one hath power to tell. 1340

'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen:
Yet save that labour, for I have them here.
What should I say? One of my husband's men
Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear; 1345
Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;
The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.'

Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,
First hovering o'er the paper with her quill:
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight; 1350
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill:
Much like a press of people at a door,
Throng her inventions, which shall go before.

At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord 1355
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t' afford--
If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see--
Some present speed to come and visit me.
So, I commend me from our house in grief: 1360
My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.'

Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.
By this short schedule Collatine may know
Her grief, but not her grief's true quality: 1365
She dares not thereof make discovery,
Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,
Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse.

Besides, the life and feeling of her passion
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her: 1370
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
From that suspicion which the world might bear her.
To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter
With words, till action might become them better. 1375

To see sad sights moves more than hear them told;
For then eye interprets to the ear
The heavy motion that it doth behold,
When every part a part of woe doth bear.
'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear: 1380
Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,
And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.

Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ
'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.'
The post attends, and she delivers it, 1385
Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast
As lagging fowls before the northern blast:
Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems:
Extremity still urgeth such extremes.

The homely villain court'sies to her low; 1390
And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye
Receives the scroll without or yea or no,
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie
Imagine every eye beholds their blame; 1395
For Lucrece thought he blush'd to her see shame:

When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect
Of spirit, Life, and bold audacity.
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
To talk in deeds, while others saucily 1400
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely:
Even so this pattern of the worn-out age
Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage.

His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
That two red fires in both their faces blazed; 1405
She thought he blush'd, as knowing Tarquin's lust,
And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed;
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed:
The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
The more she thought he spied in her some blemish. 1410

But long she thinks till he return again,
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.
The weary time she cannot entertain,
For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, and groan:
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, 1415
That she her plaints a little while doth stay,
Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.

At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy:
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece. 1420
For Helen's rape the city to destroy,
Threatening cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;
Which the conceited painter drew so proud,
As heaven, it seem'd, to kiss the turrets bow'd.

A thousand lamentable objects there, 1425
In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life:
Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear,
Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife:
The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife;
And dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights, 1430
Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.

There might you see the labouring pioner
Begrimed with sweat, and smeared all with dust;
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust, 1435
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust:
Such sweet observance in this work was had,
That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.

In great commanders grace and majesty
You might behold, triumphing in their faces; 1440
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;
Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces;
Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,
That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.

In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art 1445
Of physiognomy might one behold!
The face of either cipher'd either's heart;
Their face their manners most expressly told:
In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigor roll'd;
But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent 1450
Show'd deep regard and smiling government.

There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,
As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight;
Making such sober action with his hand,
That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight: 1455
In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white,
Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly
Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky.

About him were a press of gaping faces,
Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice; 1460
All jointly listening, but with several graces,
As if some mermaid did their ears entice,
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice;
The scalps of many, almost hid behind,
To jump up higher seem'd, to mock the mind. 1465

Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head,
His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear;
Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and red;
Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear;
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear, 1470
As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words,
It seem'd they would debate with angry swords.

For much imaginary work was there;
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
That for Achilles' image stood his spear, 1475
Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind,
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind:
A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
Stood for the whole to be imagined.

And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy 1480
When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field,
Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;
And to their hope they such odd action yield,
That through their light joy seemed to appear, 1485
Like bright things stain'd, a kind of heavy fear.

And from the strand of Dardan, where they fought,
To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran,
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
With swelling ridges; and their ranks began 1490
To break upon the galled shore, and than
Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,
They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks.

To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,
To find a face where all distress is stell'd. 1495
Many she sees where cares have carved some,
But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd,
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,
Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes,
Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies. 1500

In her the painter had anatomized
Time's ruin, beauty's wreck, and grim care's reign:
Her cheeks with chaps and wrinkles were disguised;
Of what she was no semblance did remain:
Her blue blood changed to black in every vein, 1505
Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,
Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead.

On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,
And shapes her sorrow to the beldam's woes,
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, 1510
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes:
The painter was no god to lend her those;
And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
To give her so much grief and not a tongue.

'Poor instrument,' quoth she,'without a sound, 1515
I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue;
And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound,
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong;
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long;
And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes 1520
Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.

'Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
That with my nails her beauty I may tear.
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear: 1525
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here;
And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,
The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.

'Why should the private pleasure of some one
Become the public plague of many moe? 1530
Let sin, alone committed, light alone
Upon his head that hath transgressed so;
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe:
For one's offence why should so many fall,
To plague a private sin in general? 1535

'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds,
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
And one man's lust these many lives confounds: 1540
Had doting Priam cheque'd his son's desire,
Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.'

Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes:
For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; 1545
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:
So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell
To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow;
She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.

She throws her eyes about the painting round, 1550
And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament.
At last she sees a wretched image bound,
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent:
His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content;
Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, 1555
So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes.

In him the painter labour'd with his skill
To hide deceit, and give the harmless show
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,
A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe; 1560
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so
That blushing red no guilty instance gave,
Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.

But, like a constant and confirmed devil,
He entertain'd a show so seeming just, 1565
And therein so ensconced his secret evil,
That jealousy itself could not mistrust
False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust
Into so bright a day such black-faced storms,
Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms. 1570

The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story
The credulous old Priam after slew;
Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, 1575
And little stars shot from their fixed places,
When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces.

This picture she advisedly perused,
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill,
Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused; 1580
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill:
And still on him she gazed; and gazing still,
Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
That she concludes the picture was belied.

'It cannot be,' quoth she,'that so much guile'-- 1585
She would have said 'can lurk in such a look;'
But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while,
And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took:
'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook,
And turn'd it thus,' It cannot be, I find, 1590
But such a face should bear a wicked mind.

'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted.
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,
As if with grief or travail he had fainted,
To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled 1595
With outward honesty, but yet defiled
With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,
So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.

'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,
To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds! 1600
Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?
For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds:
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;
Those round clear pearls of his, that move thy pity,
Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city. 1605

'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell;
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell;
These contraries such unity do hold,
Only to flatter fools and make them bold: 1610
So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter,
That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.'

Here, all enraged, such passion her assails,
That patience is quite beaten from her breast.
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, 1615
Comparing him to that unhappy guest
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest:
At last she smilingly with this gives o'er;
'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.'

Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, 1620
And time doth weary time with her complaining.
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
And both she thinks too long with her remaining:
Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining:
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps, 1625
And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.

Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought,
That she with painted images hath spent;
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought
By deep surmise of others' detriment; 1630
Losing her woes in shows of discontent.
It easeth some, though none it ever cured,
To think their dolour others have endured.

But now the mindful messenger, come back,
Brings home his lord and other company; 1635
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black:
And round about her tear-stained eye
Blue circles stream'd; like rainbows in the sky:
These water-galls in her dim element
Foretell new storms to those already spent. 1640

Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,
Amazedly in her sad face he stares:
Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw,
Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares.
He hath no power to ask her how she fares: 1645
Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance,
Met far from home, wondering each other's chance.

At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,
And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event
Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand? 1650
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?
Why art thou thus attired in discontent?
Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,
And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.'

Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire, 1655
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:
At length address'd to answer his desire,
She modestly prepares to let them know
Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe;
While Collatine and his consorted lords 1660
With sad attention long to hear her words.

And now this pale swan in her watery nest
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending;
'Few words,' quoth she, 'Shall fit the trespass best,
Where no excuse can give the fault amending: 1665
In me moe woes than words are now depending;
And my laments would be drawn out too long,
To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.

'Then be this all the task it hath to say
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed 1670
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay
Where thou was wont to rest thy weary head;
And what wrong else may be imagined
By foul enforcement might be done to me,
From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free. 1675

'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,
With shining falchion in my chamber came
A creeping creature, with a flaming light,
And softly cried 'Awake, thou Roman dame,
And entertain my love; else lasting shame 1680
On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
If thou my love's desire do contradict.

'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine,' quoth he,
'Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee 1685
And swear I found you where you did fulfil
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill
The lechers in their deed: this act will be
My fame and thy perpetual infamy.'

'With this, I did begin to start and cry; 1690
And then against my heart he sets his sword,
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
I should not live to speak another word;
So should my shame still rest upon record,
And never be forgot in mighty Rome 1695
Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.

'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
And far the weaker with so strong a fear:
My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;
No rightful plea might plead for justice there: 1700
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear
That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes;
And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies.

'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse!
Or at the least this refuge let me find; 1705
Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse,
Immaculate and spotless is my mind;
That was not forced; that never was inclined
To accessary yieldings, but still pure
Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.' 1710

Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss,
With head declined, and voice damm'd up with woe,
With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across,
From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow
The grief away that stops his answer so: 1715
But, wretched as he is, he strives in vain;
What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.

As through an arch the violent roaring tide
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste,
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride 1720
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast;
In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past:
Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw,
To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.

Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth, 1725
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:
'Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh
More feeling-painful: let it then suffice 1730
To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.

'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so,
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me:
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me 1735
From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me
Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die;
For sparing justice feeds iniquity.

'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she,
Speaking to those that came with Collatine, 1740
'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;
For 'tis a meritorious fair design
To chase injustice with revengeful arms:
Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.' 1745

At this request, with noble disposition
Each present lord began to promise aid,
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd.
But she, that yet her sad task hath not said, 1750
The protestation stops. 'O, speak, ' quoth she,
'How may this forced stain be wiped from me?

'What is the quality of mine offence,
Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance?
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, 1755
My low-declined honour to advance?
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
The poison'd fountain clears itself again;
And why not I from this compelled stain?'

With this, they all at once began to say, 1760
Her body's stain her mind untainted clears;
While with a joyless smile she turns away
The face, that map which deep impression bears
Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears.
'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living, 1765
By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving.'

Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
She throws forth Tarquin's name; 'He, he,' she says,
But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak;
Till after many accents and delays, 1770
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,
She utters this, 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he,
That guides this hand to give this wound to me.'

Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed: 1775
That blow did that it from the deep unrest
Of that polluted prison where it breathed:
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeath'd
Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly
Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny. 1780

Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed,
Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew;
Till Lucrece' father, that beholds her bleed,
Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw;
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew 1785
The murderous knife, and, as it left the place,
Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;

And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
Circles her body in on every side, 1790
Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.
Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd,
And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd.

About the mourning and congealed face 1795
Of that black blood a watery rigol goes,
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place:
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes,
Corrupted blood some watery token shows;
And blood untainted still doth red abide, 1800
Blushing at that which is so putrified.

'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries,
'That life was mine which thou hast here deprived.
If in the child the father's image lies,
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived? 1805
Thou wast not to this end from me derived.
If children predecease progenitors,
We are their offspring, and they none of ours.

'Poor broken glass, I often did behold
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born; 1810
But now that fresh fair mirror, dim and old,
Shows me a bare-boned death by time out-worn:
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn,
And shivered all the beauty of my glass,
That I no more can see what once I was! 1815

'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,
If they surcease to be that should survive.
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger
And leave the faltering feeble souls alive?
The old bees die, the young possess their hive: 1820
Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see
Thy father die, and not thy father thee!

By this, starts Collatine as from a dream,
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;
And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream 1825
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
And counterfeits to die with her a space;
Till manly shame bids him possess his breath
And live to be revenged on her death.

The deep vexation of his inward soul 1830
Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue;
Who, mad that sorrow should his use control,
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng
Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid, 1835
That no man could distinguish what he said.

Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain,
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,
Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more; 1840
At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er:
Then son and father weep with equal strife
Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.

The one doth call her his, the other his,
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay. 1845
The father says 'She's mine.' 'O, mine she is,'
Replies her husband: 'do not take away
My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say
He weeps for her, for she was only mine,
And only must be wail'd by Collatine.' 1850

'O,' quoth Lucretius,' I did give that life
Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.'
'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife,
I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.'
'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd 1855
The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece' life,
Answer'd their cries, 'my daughter' and 'my wife.'

Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side,
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, 1860
Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show.
He with the Romans was esteemed so
As silly-jeering idiots are with kings,
For sportive words and uttering foolish things:

But now he throws that shallow habit by, 1865
Wherein deep policy did him disguise;
And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly,
To cheque the tears in Collatinus' eyes.
'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth be, 'arise:
Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool, 1870
Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.

'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? 1875
Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds:
Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.

'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart
In such relenting dew of lamentations; 1880
But kneel with me and help to bear thy part,
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,
That they will suffer these abominations,
Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced,
By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased. 1885

'Now, by the Capitol that we adore,
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd,
By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store,
By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd,
And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd 1890
Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
We will revenge the death of this true wife.'

This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,
And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow;
And to his protestation urged the rest, 1895
Who, wondering at him, did his words allow:
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow;
And that deep vow, which Brutus made before,
He doth again repeat, and that they swore.

When they had sworn to this advised doom, 1900
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence;
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,
And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence:
Which being done with speedy diligence,
The Romans plausibly did give consent 1905
To Tarquin's everlasting banishment.

