not requiring or staying for the people's suffrages, had
Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.
Is madly toss'd between desire and dread;
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb
the people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a
The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed.
O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!
That through the length of times he stands disgraced:
The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;
Let fair humanity abhor the deed
That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.
That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed.
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried;
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred;
Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red,
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;
That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;
Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed,
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;
Though death be adjunct, there's no death supposed.
The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted
Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted
The branches of another root are rotted,
When at Collatium this false lord arrived,
Within whose face beauty and virtue strived
Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field,
Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield;
The coward captive vanquished doth yield
Which virtue gave the golden age to gild
'Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child,
Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd,
Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd
O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold,
The same disgrace which they themselves behold;
To have their unseen sin remain untold;
'The aged man that coffers-up his gold
Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old!
Lucretia. In that pleasant humour they posted to Rome; and
camp; from whence he shortly after privily withdrew himself, and
revenge, revealed the actor, and whole manner of his dealing, and
Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand
'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend,
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? 950
The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd?
She bears the load of lust he left behind,
Some purer chest to close so pure a mind.
They scatter and unloose it from their bond,
Those that much covet are with gain so fond,
The threshold grates the door to have him heard;
That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,
Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd:
Thou black'st reproach against long-living laud,
'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud:
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.
But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head:
His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
I know repentant tears ensue the deed,
All pure effects, and doth so far proceed,
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;
O, had they in that darksome prison died!
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended;
Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed?
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
By their high treason is his heart misled;
By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
With more than admiration he admired
And in his will his wilful eye he tired.
And him by oath they truly honoured.
But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd,
Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd.
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band,
Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;
His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
He pens her piteous clamours in her head;
End thy ill aim before thy shoot be ended;
And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed,
For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced;
With such black payment as thou hast pretended;
When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?
His venom in effect is purified.
In a pure compound; being so applied,
Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled,
But beauty, in that white intituled,
By reprobate desire thus madly led,
For, after supper, long he questioned
What did he note but strongly he desired?
And when great treasure is the meed proposed,
And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.
For lawful policy remains enacted.
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
What could he see but mightily he noted?
And undeserved reproach to him allotted 875
For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted:
'And how her hand, in my hand being lock'd
From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field:
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold:
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,
Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
A little harm done to a great good end
'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend:
But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.
If all these pretty ills shall change thy good,
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd?
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.
Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood.
And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd?
And he the burden of a guilty mind.
May feel her heart-poor citizen!--distress'd,
Each one by him enforced, retires his ward;
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard:
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?
Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd!
Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd; 935
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix'd,
And when his gaudy banner is display'd,
The coward fights and will not be dismay'd.
after he had caused his own father-in-law Servius Tullius to be
And therefore would they still in darkness be,
Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face, 880
And makest fair reputation but a bawd.
Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix'd
For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be:
So that in venturing ill we leave to be
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face;
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
Let not the jealous Day behold that face
Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face,
That it will live engraven in my face.
Through little vents and crannies of the place
She puts the period often from his place;
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,
The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace,
Which to her oratory adds more grace.
'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace!
Immodestly lies martyr'd with disgrace!
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace,
The Rape of Lucrece
He scowls and hates himself for his offence;
He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade,
May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!
This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
What needeth then apologies be made,
That all the faults which in thy reign are made 855
Beauty itself doth of itself persuade
Where thou with patience must my will abide;
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:
The lesser thing should not the greater hide;
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride:
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
Then Collatine again, by Lucrece' side,
Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side,
'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee:
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee
No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee:
'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide
'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!
And with his knee the door he opens wide.
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee;
My honour lost, and I, a drone-like bee,
My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee:
Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?
Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee;
The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee,
'Lucrece,' quoth he,'this night I must enjoy thee:
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee:
'They think not but that every eye can see
The aim of all is but to nurse the life
But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,
But that life lived in death, and death in life.
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,
As in revenge or quittal of such strife:
As if between them twain there were no strife,
This forced league doth force a further strife;
whom Collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity of his wife
Might have excuse to work upon his wife,
Respect and reason, wait on wrinkled age!
'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,
That one for all, or all for one we gage;
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
This siege that hath engirt his marriage,
As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage.
Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage
As life for honour in fell battle's rage;
If in thy hope thou darest do such outrage,
Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage;
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage:
And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,
and other noblemen of Rome, to besiege Ardea. During which siege
they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the
bitter invective against the tyranny of the king: wherewith the
into her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the
his passions for the present, departed with the rest back to the
'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die!
But coward-like with trembling terror die.
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake,
Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
'O, what excuse can my invention make,
And for himself himself be must forsake:
'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake,
And every one to rest themselves betake,
That even for anger makes the lily pale,
That kings might be espoused to more fame,
'O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke, 850
Under that colour am I come to scale
The shame that from them no device can take,
Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake.
Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
Left there round turrets destitute and pale.
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale:
Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame,
But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.
Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame!
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,
Which of them both should underprop her fame:
He stories to her ears her husband's fame,
Dim register and notary of shame!
This dying virtue, this surviving shame,
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?
'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,
When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame;
Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame;
Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame!
Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?
Authority for sin, warrant for blame,
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,
And decks with praises Collatine's high name,
And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; 865
To privilege dishonour in thy name?
Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name.
Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same,
Myself a weakling; do not then ensnare me:
'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me:
Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me:
Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me.
'Where now I have no one to blush with me,
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,
To all the host of heaven I complain me,
Make war against proportion'd course of time; 825
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time,
'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me, 885
So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,
To darken her whose light excelleth thine:
Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine,
Unto a view so false will not incline;
Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
That is as clear from this attaint of mine
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.
That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.'
But I alone alone must sit and pine,
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine:
How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine. 870
As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.
And in the self-same seat sits Collatine:
That eye which him beholds, as more divine,
With your uncleanness that which is divine;
And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done
another to the camp for Collatine. They came, the one
And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,
To strike a poor unseasonable doe.
Rather than triumph in so false a foe.
To sound a parley to his heartless foe;
He makes excuses for his being there:
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;
Night-wandering weasels shriek to see him there;
'Think but how vile a spectacle it were,
'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire
Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire
Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.
Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,
His true respect will prison false desire,
Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire,
And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
So Lucrece must I force to my desire.'
'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire,
That to his borrow'd bed he make retire,
Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire:
Till like a jade Self-will himself doth tire.
And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.
Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,
That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more.
Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store,
Then my digression is so vile, so base,
Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case:
Extinguishing his conduct in this case;
Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,
Then looking scornfully, he doth despise
What following sorrow may on this arise:
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
Now serves the season that they may surprise
O, how her fear did make her colour rise!
His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those:
and finding Lucrece attired in mourning habit, demanded the cause
He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;
And in his inward mind he doth debate
But some untimely thought did instigate
Soft pity enters at an iron gate.
Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate,
In the possession of his beauteous mate;
That nothing in him seem'd inordinate,
Melt at my tears, and be compassionate!
Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate,
Here pale with fear he doth premeditate
For that he colour'd with his high estate,
acclamation the Tarquins were all exiled, and the state
His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,
'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state'--
Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state;
To praise the clear unmatched red and white
When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white.
Virtue would stain that o'er with silver white.
Argued by beauty's red and virtue's white
On the green coverlet; whose perfect white
When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.
This bateless edge on his keen appetite;
He thence departs a heavy convertite;
To cipher me how fondly I did dote;
That my posterity, shamed with the note
Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.
Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.'
Is not inured; return again in haste;
To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste
Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste:
Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.'
That some impurity doth not pollute. 905
But no perfection is so absolute,
Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue,--
Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue,
The sight which makes supposed terror true.
True valour still a true respect should have;
'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;
A martial man to be soft fancy's slave!
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave:
O foul dishonour to my household's grave!
Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,
'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive,
She conjures him by high almighty Jove,
But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love:
By her untimely tears, her husband's love,
If but for fear of this, thy will remove;
When they in thee the like offences prove:
Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.'
Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe
Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.
My heart shall never countermand mine eye:
Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye
His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye;
The scornful mark of every open eye;
Save something too much wonder of his eye,
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.
Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;
Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief! 940
intending, by their secret and sudden arrival, to make trial of
the principal men of the army meeting one evening at the tent of
Which blows these pitchy vapours from their bidding,
In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding,
Hindering their present fall by this dividing;
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,
But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing
Pain pays the income of each precious thing;
For kings like gods should govern everything.
Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king;
Suggested this proud issue of a king;
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking;
What darest thou not when once thou art a king?
What terror or 'tis! but she, in worser taking,
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.
Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king;
Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining;
No penetrable entrance to her plaining:
Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.
The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining;
Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining:
Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,
'I see what crosses my attempt will bring;
Tarquinius being inflamed with Lucrece' beauty, yet smothering
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring,
'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring; 920
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring!
His taste delicious, in digestion souring,
Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting,
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting:
And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
I think the honey guarded with a sting;
Braving compare, disdainfully did sting
Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,
As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving
Hateful it is; there is no hate in loving:
My will is strong, past reason's weak removing.
The worst is but denial and reproving:
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.
supper every one commended the virtues of his own wife: among
Their father was too weak, and they too strong,
In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,
And leaves it to be master'd by his young;
But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,
Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch:
The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch:
This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch,
Showing life's triumph in the map of death,
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath,
Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath;
'Thou makest the vestal violate her oath;
Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;
All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth;
Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth:
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,
Lucrece at Collatium. The same night he treacherously stealeth
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth:
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth:
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
By holy human law, and common troth,
Thou smother'st honesty, thou murder'st troth;
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
Coming from thee, I could not put him back,
'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack;
And let thy misty vapours march so thick,
Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick;
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick 830
And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek,
Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,
'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?
Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week?
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk
For princes are the glass, the school, the book,
Where subjects' eyes do learn, do read, do look.
He takes for accidental things of trial;
To living death and pain perpetual:
Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.'
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfil,
Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,
I sue for exiled majesty's repeal;
'To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
He in the worst sense construes their denial:
people were so moved, that with one consent and a general
And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,
When virtue is profaned in such a devil!
This earthly saint, adored by this devil,
For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil;
And talk'd of virtue: O unlook'd-for evil,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Her immortality, and made her thrall
Have batter'd down her consecrated wall,
Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!--
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell!
'O comfort-killing Night, image of hell!
Which in a moment doth confound and kill
While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.
But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;
Then had they seen the period of their ill;
But, as they open, they all rate his ill,
Under what colour he commits this ill.
Which in her prescience she controlled still,
In his clear bed might have reposed still:
The silly lambs: pure thoughts are dead and still,
Urging the worser sense for vantage still;
But she with vehement prayers urgeth still
'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,
From a pure heart command thy rebel will:
But her foresight could not forestall their will.
The locks between her chamber and his will,
But nothing can affection's course control,
'I have debated, even in my soul,
And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.
For it had been dishonour to disdain him: 895
Besides, of weariness he did complain him,
Yet for thy honour did I entertain him;
The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him,
But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;
Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.
And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
To be thy partner in this shameful doom.'
For now against himself he sounds this doom,
Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
But honest fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm,
Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm;
Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm;
'All which together, like a troubled ocean,
This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen,
Of either's colour was the other queen,
This hot desire converts to cold disdain:
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
And he hath won what he would lose again:
Through Night's black bosom should not peep again:
That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.
A captive victor that hath lost in gain;
Having no other pleasure of his gain
The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;
'So thy surviving husband shall remain
This momentary joy breeds months of pain;
Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain.
But torment that it cannot cure his pain.
So should I have co-partners in my pain; 840
The silver-shining queen he would distain;
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
To wish that I their father had not bin.
First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin
That for his prey to pray he doth begin,
Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.
Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin
As if the heavens should countenance his sin.
So cross him with their opposite persuasion,
That now he vows a league, and now invasion.
While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation
Can comprehend in still imagination!
Ere he can see his own abomination.
And with good thoughts make dispensation,
'Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
Thus, graceless, holds he disputation
If that be made a theme for disputation,
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
She says, her subjects with foul insurrection
To soften it with their continual motion;
The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution;
My will is back'd with resolution:
Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution.
To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.
Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon
'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason;
'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason:
Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season; 930
'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?
Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern
An expired date, cancell'd ere well begun:
Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,
Against the golden splendor of the sun!
Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?
'Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known:
Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown
Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
I'll beg her love; but she is own:
From thievish ears, because it is his own?
To those two armies that would let him go,
The niggard prodigal that praised her so,--
O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar!
Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear,
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear!
As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear
'This deed will make thee only loved for fear;
Birds never limed no secret bushes fear:
They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.
He faintly flies, sneaking with guilty fear;
Away he steals with open listening ear,
Until her husband's welfare she did hear;
Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear;
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear;
She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear;
And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar,
To set forth that which is so singular?
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer,
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer
of her sorrow. She, first taking an oath of them for her
Or why is Collatine the publisher
With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!
No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather
hastily dispatcheth messengers, one to Rome for her father,
Far from the purpose of his coming hither,
Their own transgressions partially they smother:
To view thy present trespass in another.
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
his wife, though it were late in the night, spinning amongst her
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier:
Little suspecteth the false worshipper;
Sextus Tarquinius, the king's son, in their discourses after
Even there he starts: quoth he, 'I must deflower:
Having solicited th' eternal power
But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,
'With rotten damps ravish the morning air;
maids: the other ladies were all found dancing and revelling, or
Now is he come unto the chamber-door,
The eyes of men without an orator;
Without the bed her other fair hand was,
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds:
Grim cave of death! whispering conspirator
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;
Advice is sporting while infection breeds:
The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.'
Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands,
I know what thorns the growing rose defends;
All this beforehand counsel comprehends:
But will is deaf and hears no heedful friends;
that which every one had before avouched, only Collatinus finds
Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.
Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages, 960
Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies
Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies:
Which, like a falcon towering in the skies,
Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies,
Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?'
Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies;
So under his insulting falchion lies
Where her beloved Collatinus lies.
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
O, how are they wrapp'd in with infamies
For light and lust are deadly enemies:
And being lighted, by the light he spies
The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries;
No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries;
And fright her with confusion of their cries:
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries;
Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties,
With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.
And sung by children in succeeding times.
Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes,
Neglected all, with swift intent he goes
To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
To ask the spotted princess how she fares.
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;
Their silent war of lilies and of roses,
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;
'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?
To be admired of lewd unhallow'd eyes.
In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.
When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes:
She, much amazed, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes,
And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes,
But she, that never coped with stranger eyes,
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes:
That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!
Between whose hills her head entombed is:
That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.
And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,
And griping it, the needle his finger pricks;
As who should say 'This glove to wanton tricks
Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks:
Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
The curtains being close, about he walks,
To cipher what is writ in learned books,
Writ in the glassy margents of such books:
She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks;
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.
With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells.
Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells
government changed from kings to consuls.
cruelly murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs,
'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!
Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms.
O impious act, including all foul harms!
Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms,
Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.
If ever man were moved with woman moans,
Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,
Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans:
His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins:
possessed himself of the kingdom, went, accompanied with his sons
'The patient dies while the physician sleeps; 955
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;
Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears,
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears
For with the nightly linen that she wears
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;
And therein heartens up his servile powers,
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;
Even in the moment that we call them ours.
The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours
We have no good that we can say is ours,
What virtue breeds iniquity devours:
Show'd like an April daisy on the grass,
And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.
Or, gaining more, the profit of excess
And so, by hoping more, they have but less;
Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express,
For what they have not, that which they possess
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.
Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits;
Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,
And useless barns the harvest of his wits; 910
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Or kings be breakers of their own behests?
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? 900
Lucius Tarquinius, for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus,
accompanied with Junius Brutus, the other with Publius Valerius;
in several disports. Whereupon the noblemen yielded Collatinus
the victory, and his wife the fame. At that time Sextus
Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws,
Pleads, in a wilderness where are no laws,
Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,
To quench the coal which in his liver glows.
Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!
For there it revels; and when that decays,
To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?
So his unhallow'd haste her words delays,
And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.
The guilty rebel for remission prays.
When he himself himself confounds, betrays
The sovereignty of either being so great,
'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great!
But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat,
That oft they interchange each other's seat.
And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;
Till every minute pays the hour his debt.
The petty streams that pay a daily debt
How can they then assist me in the act?
The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,
In having much, torments us with defect
Of that we have: so then we do neglect
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
The things we are for that which we expect;
From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get,
Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get;
Who with a lingering slay his course doth let,
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.
When Collatine unwisely did not let
They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
And with the wind in greater fury fret:
Have no perfection of my summer left,
Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light
He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loathed delight.
Haply that name of 'chaste' unhappily set
But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft:
From me by strong assault it is bereft.
'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night!
Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight;
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;
Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight.
My will that marks thee for my earth's delight,
Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight,
Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.'
The prey wherein by nature they delight;
This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
More than his eyes were open'd to the light.
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
He in his speed looks for the morning light;
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,
morning speedeth away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight,
To wink, being blinded with a greater light:
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
No comfortable star did lend his light,
Which I to conquer sought with all my might;
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:
Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
Imagine her as one in dead of night
With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night.
Against the unseen secrecy of night:
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
May set at noon and make perpetual night. 835
She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night:
The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
Whether it is that she reflects so bright,
To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,
Intending weariness with heavy spright;
Proving from world's minority their right:
Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
So from himself impiety hath wrought,
Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing be sought.
O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit
Who in their pride do presently abuse it: 915
'So then he hath it when he cannot use it,
Make something nothing by augmenting it.
The thing we have; and, all for want of wit,
That golden hap which their superiors want.
What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
The Argument
withal suddenly stabbed herself. Which done, with one consent
'If Collatinus dream of my intent,
For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent,
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt
The blemish that will never be forgot;
Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour's blot:
And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot
Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot
'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not
The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot,
But low shrubs wither at the cedar's root.
And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept.
In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept, 890
Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt,
But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart,
Which once corrupted takes the worser part;
O, if no harder than a stone thou art,
For stones dissolved to water do convert.
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
His hand, that yet remains upon her breast,--
Thy private feasting to a public fast,
Thy violent vanities can never last. 945
Here she exclaims against repose and rest,
And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
And girdle with embracing flames the waist
Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,
The death of all, and all together lost.
From the besieged Ardea all in post,
Both which, as servitors to the unjust,
And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
Is almost choked by unresisted lust.
His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust,
Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;
Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?
Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust;
Who, like a foul ursurper, went about
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.
Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw
As is the morning's silver-melting dew
O happiness enjoy'd but of a few!
From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
He is no woodman that doth bend his bow
And my true eyes have never practised how
Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show,
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,
'You mocking-birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb:
'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,
The one will live, the other being dead:
And who cannot abuse a body dead?
Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead.
A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head,
Where thou was wont to rest thy weary head;
That dying fear through all her body spread;
Such sweet observance in this work was had,
At his own shadow let the thief run mad,
That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.
Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed 1670
Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced,
True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed
And solemn night with slow sad gait descended
By this, lamenting Philomel had ended 1130
Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed,
Till Lucrece' father, that beholds her bleed,
Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed: 1775
Of that polluted prison where it breathed:
Blushing at that which is so putrified.
That she concludes the picture was belied.
Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
With outward honesty, but yet defiled
To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled 1595
To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled,
Stood for the whole to be imagined.
And what wrong else may be imagined
That was not forced; that never was inclined
So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred;
To eat up errors by opinion bred,
Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and red;
It easeth some, though none it ever cured,
To think their dolour others have endured.
That wounds my body so dishonoured.
By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased. 1885
Her cheeks with chaps and wrinkles were disguised;
Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused; 1580
This picture she advisedly perused,
As if with grief or travail he had fainted,
'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted.
'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted,
Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted,
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived? 1805
Thou wast not to this end from me derived.
'That life was mine which thou hast here deprived.
And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed;
That two red fires in both their faces blazed; 1405
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed:
When with like semblance it is sympathized.
In her the painter had anatomized
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeath'd
Each present lord began to promise aid,
This Plot of death when sadly she had laid,
'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid,
With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid, 1265
He gratis comes; and thou art well appaid 965
That no man could distinguish what he said.
As well to hear as grant what he hath said.
But she, that yet her sad task hath not said, 1750
Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid, 1835
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid:
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,
When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field,
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;
And to their hope they such odd action yield,
To make the child a man, the man a child, 1005
True grief is fond and testy as a child, 1145
Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild;
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,
To tame the unicorn and lion wild,
Continuance tames the one; the other wild,
To find a face where all distress is stell'd. 1495
But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd,
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd
'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd 1855
I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.'
But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd:
Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.'
In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigor roll'd;
Only to flatter fools and make them bold: 1610
'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
But now that fresh fair mirror, dim and old,
Will we find out; and there we will unfold
'Poor broken glass, I often did behold
As shaming any eye should thee behold,
Of physiognomy might one behold!
The heavy motion that it doth behold,
These contraries such unity do hold,
'O, peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told,
To see sad sights moves more than hear them told;
Their face their manners most expressly told:
One justly weeps; the other takes in hand
Making such sober action with his hand,
At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,
Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand? 1650
There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,
A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd 1890
Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd,
By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd,
And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd.
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd,
And turn'd it thus,' It cannot be, I find, 1590
Or at the least this refuge let me find; 1705
The scalps of many, almost hid behind,
Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind,
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
But such a face should bear a wicked mind.
To jump up higher seem'd, to mock the mind. 1465
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind:
Immaculate and spotless is my mind;
At last she sees a wretched image bound,
My shame be his that did my fame confound;
My soul and body to the skies and ground; 1250
She throws her eyes about the painting round, 1550
'Poor instrument,' quoth she,'without a sound, 1515
And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound,
Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound;
He ten times pines that pines beholding food;
If tears could help, mine own would do me good.
The remedy indeed to do me good
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;
Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood. 1080
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.
Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood: 1325
Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood
So should my shame still rest upon record,
Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t' afford--
At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord 1355
I should not live to speak another word;
And then against my heart he sets his sword,
The moon being clouded presently is miss'd,
Which the conceited painter drew so proud,
As heaven, it seem'd, to kiss the turrets bow'd.
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd.
'But tell me, girl, when went'--and there she stay'd
And all my fame that lives disbursed be
And therefore still in night would cloister'd be.
The lechers in their deed: this act will be
Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.'
So am I now: O no, that cannot be; 1100
By whose example thou revenged mayest be. 1245
About the mourning and congealed face 1795
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place:
The murderous knife, and, as it left the place,
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;
And counterfeits to die with her a space;
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece. 1420
At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
More feeling-painful: let it then suffice 1730
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice;
As if some mermaid did their ears entice,
Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice; 1460
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
Met far from home, wondering each other's chance.
Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance,
Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance?
My low-declined honour to advance?
Till life to death acquit my forced offence.
'What is the quality of mine offence,
And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence:
'The more to blame my sluggard negligence: 1330
Which being done with speedy diligence,
Till after a deep groan--'Tarquin from hence?'
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence;
And blood untainted still doth red abide, 1800
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, 1860
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride 1720
Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side,
Circles her body in on every side, 1790
As through an arch the violent roaring tide
And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide
They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee,
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
'When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee,
For if I die, my honour lives in thee;
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
Thy father die, and not thy father thee!
I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee 1685
Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee:
When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee.
'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree?
From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free. 1675
Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see
But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, 1135
If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see--
'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life;
The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece' life,
In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life:
Some happy mean to end a hapless life.
'O,' quoth Lucretius,' I did give that life
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife:
'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife 1235
Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
Then son and father weep with equal strife
The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife;
Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife:
We will revenge the death of this true wife.'
But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife:
Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.
Answer'd their cries, 'my daughter' and 'my wife.'
'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife,
Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage.
'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
One poor retiring minute in an age
Even so this pattern of the worn-out age
'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine,' quoth he,
The protestation stops. 'O, speak, ' quoth she,
'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she,
She utters this, 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he,
Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die. 1190
And therefore now I need not fear to die.
The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.
Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die;
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie
'This brief abridgement of my will I make:
My resolution, husband, do thou take;
As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,
Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.'
That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.
Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,
But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while,
'It cannot be,' quoth she,'that so much guile'-- 1585
If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole
With shining falchion in my chamber came
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame, 1085
And softly cried 'Awake, thou Roman dame,
But if I live, thou livest in my defame:
For Lucrece thought he blush'd to her see shame:
And entertain my love; else lasting shame 1680
Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.
Honour thyself to rid me of this shame:
With men's abuses: those proud lords, to blame, 1310
Imagine every eye beholds their blame; 1395
Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.
Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me 985
Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me 1735
From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me:
To those that live, and think no shame of me. 1255
O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!
And ever let his unrecalling crime
Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.
Have time to wail th' abusing of his time. 1045
'How may this forced stain be wiped from me?
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me:
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,
And never be forgot in mighty Rome 1695
To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,
To all sins past, and all that are to come,
Many she sees where cares have carved some,
That guides this hand to give this wound to me.'
My Collatine would else have come to me
By foul enforcement might be done to me,
'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
Some present speed to come and visit me.
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, 1230
He weeps for her, for she was only mine,
Ay me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine,
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?
Speaking to those that came with Collatine, 1740
And only must be wail'd by Collatine.' 1850
'Yet die I will not till my Collatine
When the one pure, the other made divine? 1215
'Why should the private pleasure of some one
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.
Let sin, alone committed, light alone
Will slay the other and be nurse to none.
Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,
And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe,
Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe;
To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.
Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Become the public plague of many moe? 1530
A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe; 1560
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:
Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe.
With head declined, and voice damm'd up with woe,
Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe:
So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare;
And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are
Thou nursest all and murder'st all that are: 980
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here;
Yet save that labour, for I have them here.
No rightful plea might plead for justice there: 1700
For much imaginary work was there;
A thousand lamentable objects there, 1425
Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.'
Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire, 1655
'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire, 1060
But if the like the snow-white swan desire,
At length address'd to answer his desire,
Had doting Priam cheque'd his son's desire,
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show:
Which he by dumb demeanor seeks to show;
Yea the illiterate, that know not how
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
To cloak offences with a cunning brow.
The light will show, character'd in my brow,
And as their captain, so their pride doth grow,
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow: 860
And in her vaulty prison stows the Day.
'Make me not object to the tell-tale Day!
To kill thine honour with thy life's decay;
The story of sweet chastity's decay,
She prays she never may behold the day,
Till they might open to adorn the day.
Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.
First red as roses that on lawn we lay,
'For day,' quoth she, 'nights scapes doth open lay,
Upon the world dim darkness doth display,
That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay,
And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul sin may say,
The wind wars with his torch to make him stay,
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
From vassal actors can be wiped away;
Then white as lawn, the roses took away.
She there remains a hopeless castaway;
He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way?
As each unwilling portal yields him way,
If thou deny, then force must work my way,
was, according to his estate, royally entertained and lodged by
Thy issue blurr'd with nameless bastardy:
As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey,
The spots whereof could weeping purify,
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
Which, having all, all could not satisfy;
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly,
That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;
And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally,
Her tears should drop on them perpetually.
Her sad behavior feeds his vulture folly,
Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy.'
Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.'
To mask their brows and hide their infamy; 845
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
Made glorious by his manly chivalry
The orator, to deck his oratory,
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory:
'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story,
While she, the picture of pure piety,
To make the breach and enter this sweet city.
Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality
And death's dim look in life's mortality:
Or kills his life or else his quality.
Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
But ill-annexed Opportunity 925
How comes it then, vile Opportunity,
But they ne'er meet with Opportunity.
This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
For marks descried in men's nativity
Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty
O modest wantons! wanton modesty!
Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty;
Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,
And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty.
And thou, the author of their obloquy,
'Now, by the Capitol that we adore,
And that deep vow, which Brutus made before,
Throng her inventions, which shall go before.
'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore; 1165
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;
Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more; 1840
'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.'
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.
By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store,
He doth again repeat, and that they swore.
Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.' 1710
To accessary yieldings, but still pure
Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;
'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth be, 'arise:
Wherein deep policy did him disguise;
Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?
And with my trespass never will dispense,
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense;
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, 1755
The painter was no god to lend her those;
Betray'd the hours thou gavest me to repose,
Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse,
Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,
Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse.
'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse!
For me, I am the mistress of my fate, 1120
Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate.
That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate;
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate:
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state:
In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white,
In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite:
Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,
'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.'
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste,
He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute
To give her so much grief and not a tongue.
To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.
I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue;
Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue;
Of present death, and shame that might ensue
That blushing red no guilty instance gave,
For who so base would such an office have
Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.
As slanderous death's-man to so base a slave?
Let him have time to live a loathed slave, 1035
Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave,
Let him have time against himself to rave,
To clear this spot by death, at least I give
Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.
The old bees die, the young possess their hive: 1820
And leave the faltering feeble souls alive?
And time to see one that by alms doth live
'O, that is gone for which I sought to live,
If they surcease to be that should survive.
And round about her tear-stained eye
And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,
Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye;
Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye;
And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye
But eagles gazed upon with every eye.
As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze, 1200
Or one encompass'd with a winding maze,
My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.'
So, I commend me from our house in grief: 1360
Where no excuse can give the fault amending: 1665
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending;
In me moe woes than words are now depending;
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing 1055
'The baser is he, coming from a king,
Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling: 1285
No cause, but company, of her drops spilling:
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing;
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining: 1320
And time doth weary time with her complaining.
And both she thinks too long with her remaining:
raining?
Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining:
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping:
Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping: 1140
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping;
By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving.'
'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living, 1765
Such danger to resistance did belong,
And my laments would be drawn out too long,
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long;
Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng
Assail'd by night with circumstances strong
By that her death, to do her husband wrong: 1315
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong;
And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
The more she thought he spied in her some blemish. 1410
The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,
So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.
To find some desperate instrument of death:
And live to be revenged on her death.
Have heard the cause of my untimely death;
To make more vent for passage of her breath;
Till manly shame bids him possess his breath
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.
My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath,
To flatter thee with an infringed oath;
'Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth
Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth, 1725
Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:
But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth 1090
This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth,
The stained taste of violated troth; 1110
This bastard graff shall never come to growth:
By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak
My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;
But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak;
Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break
'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
But now the mindful messenger, come back,
O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black:
I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack!
She would have said 'can lurk in such a look;'
'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook,
And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took:
To plague a private sin in general? 1535
And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel;
To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel,
And swear I found you where you did fulfil
Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil.
But, like a constant and confirmed devil,
No more than wax shall be accounted evil
And the dire thought of his committed evil
Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.
And therein so ensconced his secret evil,
For one's offence why should so many fall,
For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,
And that deep torture may be call'd a hell
'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell;
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:
So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell
When more is felt than one hath power to tell. 1340
And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell;
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill:
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill
Himself himself seek every hour to kill!
With too much labour drowns for want of skill. 1150
While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill. 1185
Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill:
In him the painter labour'd with his skill
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill,
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill:
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill; 1050
Then call them not the authors of their ill, 1295
Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill!
Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still,
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,
And still on him she gazed; and gazing still,
For burden-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still,
First hovering o'er the paper with her quill:
And therefore are they form'd as marble will;
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;
'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;
'Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool, 1870
Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.
Who, mad that sorrow should his use control,
Through which I may convey this troubled soul.
The deep vexation of his inward soul 1830
By this, starts Collatine as from a dream,
And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream 1825
When they had sworn to this advised doom, 1900
From the creation to the general doom. 975
Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.
With swelling ridges; and their ranks began 1490
To break upon the galled shore, and than
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, 1415
For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, and groan:
To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran,
What should I say? One of my husband's men
'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen:
Time's ruin, beauty's wreck, and grim care's reign:
For 'tis a meritorious fair design
The poison'd fountain clears itself again;
But long she thinks till he return again,
What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.
Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain,
Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,
I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain,
Of what she was no semblance did remain:
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain 1300
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,
The weary time she cannot entertain,
And why not I from this compelled stain?'
'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain 1095
But, wretched as he is, he strives in vain;
Her blue blood changed to black in every vein, 1505
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion
Besides, the life and feeling of her passion
Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion. 1210
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
An accessary by thine inclination
Guilty of incest, that abomination;
Guilty of perjury and subornation, 970
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
At this request, with noble disposition
But with my body my poor soul's pollution?
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born; 1810
My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born.
For in my death I murder shameful scorn: 1240
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn,
Shows me a bare-boned death by time out-worn:
Receives the scroll without or yea or no,
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so
He with the Romans was esteemed so
Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, 1275
Upon his head that hath transgressed so;
'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so,
Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.'
Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so
And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so.
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
The grief away that stops his answer so: 1715
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep:
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep:
Lays open all the little worms that creep;
When every part a part of woe doth bear.
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear: 1525
And with deep groans the diapason bear;
Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear, 1470
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear; 1345
For then eye interprets to the ear
And far the weaker with so strong a fear:
Like bright things stain'd, a kind of heavy fear.
'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear: 1380
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
That through their light joy seemed to appear, 1485
That for Achilles' image stood his spear, 1475
His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear;
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear,
Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear,
That with my nails her beauty I may tear.
Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear;
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear
'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger
From that suspicion which the world might bear her.
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her: 1370
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
There might you see the labouring pioner
At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er:
At last she smilingly with this gives o'er;
'My body or my soul, which was the dearer,
Whose love of either to myself was nearer,
That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.'
'To show the beldam daughters of her daughter,
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,
So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter,
To live or die which of the twain were better, 1205
With words, till action might become them better. 1375
To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter
No man inveigh against the wither'd flower, 1305
'Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair: 1180
Let him have time of Time's help to despair,
'Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
Much like a press of people at a door,
When life is shamed, and death reproach's debtor.
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur
Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour,
That I no more can see what once I was! 1815
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;
Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds:
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? 1875
For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds:
To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds! 1600
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends: 1015
Unless thou couldst return to make amends?
The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds
To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds:
Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.'
For men have marble, women waxen, minds,
And one man's lust these many lives confounds: 1540
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds,
Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords.
Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,
While Collatine and his consorted lords 1660
And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.
As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words,
Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
With sad attention long to hear her words.
It seem'd they would debate with angry swords.
About him were a press of gaping faces,
And little stars shot from their fixed places,
For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies.
If in the child the father's image lies,
As smoke from AEtna, that in air consumes,
And shapes her sorrow to the beldam's woes,
To hide the truth of this false night's abuses:
To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes,
For sportive words and uttering foolish things:
As silly-jeering idiots are with kings,
That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes;
Thus cavils she with every thing she sees:
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, 1000
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, 1615
Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees:
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, 1510
Time's office is to fine the hate of foes;
Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes:
To endless date of never-ending woes?
So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes.
Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares.
He hath no power to ask her how she fares: 1645
And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies.
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;
Stone him with harden'd hearts harder than stones;
To cheque the tears in Collatinus' eyes.
To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.
And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes 1520
To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs,
The one doth call her his, the other his,
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes,
And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
'Time's glory is to calm contending kings, 990
The father says 'She's mine.' 'O, mine she is,'
Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, 1555
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,
All jointly listening, but with several graces,
Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.
And as one shifts, another straight ensues: 1155
On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; 1545
'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,
Of that black blood a watery rigol goes,
Amazedly in her sad face he stares:
Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses;
Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces.
You might behold, triumphing in their faces; 1440
'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, 1025
Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies. 1500
Revealing day through every cranny spies,
Extremity still urgeth such extremes.
Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.
Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces;
'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries,
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes:
Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
'Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes,
They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks.
Poor women's faces are their own fault's books.
Here, all enraged, such passion her assails,
Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems:
Into so bright a day such black-faced storms,
In such relenting dew of lamentations; 1880
That they will suffer these abominations,
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,
Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms. 1570
Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.' 1745
'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools!
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;
To chase injustice with revengeful arms:
And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.
To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,
And waste huge stones with little water drops. 1010
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps, 1625
To make him moan; but pity not his moans:
Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; 1070
We are their offspring, and they none of ours.
The face, that map which deep impression bears
Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;
Her body's stain her mind untainted clears;
Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears.
Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.
And smear with dust their glittering golden towers;
To trembling clients be you mediators:
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!
If children predecease progenitors,
To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours, 995
And shivered all the beauty of my glass,
The repetition cannot make it less;
And let mild women to him lose their mildness, 1030
Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.
She would request to know your heaviness.' 1335
Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,
And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.'
For more it is than I can well express:
Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss,
With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across,
And dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights, 1430
Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.
'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,
Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts,
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; 1175
Holds disputation with each thing she views,
Corrupted blood some watery token shows;
To blot old books and alter their contents,
And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts. 1290
Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts,
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests:
No object but her passion's strength renews;
Who being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows; 1170
Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.
Till after many accents and delays, 1770
She throws forth Tarquin's name; 'He, he,' she says,
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,
When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
If thou my love's desire do contradict.
On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,
Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet
Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night; 1075
'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night,
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight; 1350
Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
A creeping creature, with a flaming light,
To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light,
Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light,
'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,
To wake the morn and sentinel the night,
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift,
As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight;
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight:
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night:
For day hath nought to do what's done by night.'
Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright;
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.
To wrong the wronger till he render right,
That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight: 1455
'Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say 'So be it:' 1260
But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought
And from the strand of Dardan, where they fought,
Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought,
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
My life's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it.
But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent 1450
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!
That thou art doting father of his fruit. 1115
They that lose half with greater patience bear it
Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ
'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack, what were it,
The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.'
The post attends, and she delivers it, 1385
Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent:
And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament.
And as his due writ in my testament.
These water-galls in her dim element
To Tarquin's everlasting banishment.
Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,
'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment,
By deep surmise of others' detriment; 1630
Show'd deep regard and smiling government.
These means, as frets upon an instrument,
Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,
That she with painted images hath spent;
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?
Foretell new storms to those already spent. 1640
The Romans plausibly did give consent 1905
His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content;
Losing her woes in shows of discontent.
Why art thou thus attired in discontent?
And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event
My sable ground of sin I will not paint, 1125
'I will not poison thee with my attaint,
The face of either cipher'd either's heart;
'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart
To imitate thee well, against my heart
But kneel with me and help to bear thy part,
'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part,
In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art 1445
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
His time of folly and his time of sport;
And merry fools to mock at him resort; 1040
That patience is quite beaten from her breast.
This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,
Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast;
Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast
As lagging fowls before the northern blast:
My resolution, love, shall be thy boast,
In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past:
'Few words,' quoth she, 'Shall fit the trespass best,
And now this pale swan in her watery nest
And to his protestation urged the rest, 1895
That blow did that it from the deep unrest
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest:
Comparing him to that unhappy guest
But little stars may hide them when they list.
'Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,
Begrimed with sweat, and smeared all with dust;
He entertain'd a show so seeming just, 1565
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust:
She thought he blush'd, as knowing Tarquin's lust,
False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust
The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust, 1435
His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
That jealousy itself could not mistrust
Since that my case is past the help of law.
To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.
Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw,
For me, I force not argument a straw,
Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw,
Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,
The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,
The credulous old Priam after slew;
Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew;
The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew 1785
Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw;
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow;
To hide deceit, and give the harmless show
Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show.
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow
From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow
Who, wondering at him, did his words allow:
The homely villain court'sies to her low; 1390
She modestly prepares to let them know
'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know
By this short schedule Collatine may know
As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.
She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow:
Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow, 1270
To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow;
Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, 1620
And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow,
The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow,
And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow;
His leaves will wither and his sap decay;
'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day,
Myself was stirring ere the break of day,
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day:
To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay. 1845
'Then be this all the task it hath to say
With this, they all at once began to say, 1760
My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say
That she her plaints a little while doth stay,
The stain upon his silver down will stay.
So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away. 1220
Replies her husband: 'do not take away
And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.
And unperceived fly with the filth away;
Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away,
While with a joyless smile she turns away
Some dark deep desert, seated from the way, 1195
Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.
But now he throws that shallow habit by, 1865
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody:
Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy 1280
Blue circles stream'd; like rainbows in the sky:
Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky.
Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky,
And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly,
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely:
Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly
Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, 1065
To talk in deeds, while others saucily 1400
That cannot tread the way out readily;
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.
But durst not ask of her audaciously
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
Grossly engirt with daring infamy:
A dying life to living infamy:
My fame and thy perpetual infamy.'
Her mansion batter'd by the enemy;
Brings home his lord and other company; 1635
Sad souls are slain in merry company;
Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny. 1780
So with herself is she in mutiny,
Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
The little birds that tune their morning's joy
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy; 1160
Threatening cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;
And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy 1480
Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy:
For Helen's rape the city to destroy,
'With this, I did begin to start and cry; 1690
A badge of fame to slander's livery; 1105
Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city. 1605
For why her face wore sorrow's livery;
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story
Grief best is pleased with grief's society:
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, 1575
Of spirit, Life, and bold audacity.
Devise extremes beyond extremity, 1020
Those round clear pearls of his, that move thy pity,
'Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity,
For sparing justice feeds iniquity.
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;
She dares not thereof make discovery,
In great commanders grace and majesty
Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory
Then let it not be call'd impiety, 1225
'In vain I rail at Opportunity,
With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty,
Her grief, but not her grief's true quality: 1365
'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity,
