A badge of fame to slander's livery; 1105
About him were a press of gaping faces,
About the mourning and congealed face 1795
A creeping creature, with a flaming light,
A dying life to living infamy:
Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;
A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed: 1775
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear; 1345
All jointly listening, but with several graces,
Amazedly in her sad face he stares:
An accessary by thine inclination
A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe; 1560
And all my fame that lives disbursed be
And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly,
And as his due writ in my testament.
And as one shifts, another straight ensues: 1155
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes:
And blood untainted still doth red abide, 1800
And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye
And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed;
And both she thinks too long with her remaining:
And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide
And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd 1890
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd,
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill,
And counterfeits to die with her a space;
And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound,
And dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights, 1430
And entertain my love; else lasting shame 1680
And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.
And ever let his unrecalling crime
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes,
And far the weaker with so strong a fear:
And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so.
'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so,
'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day,
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took:
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew 1785
And from the strand of Dardan, where they fought,
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy 1480
And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb:
And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell;
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear, 1470
And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow;
And leave the faltering feeble souls alive?
And let mild women to him lose their mildness, 1030
And little stars shot from their fixed places,
And live to be revenged on her death.
And merry fools to mock at him resort; 1040
And my laments would be drawn out too long,
And never be forgot in mighty Rome 1695
And now this pale swan in her watery nest
And one man's lust these many lives confounds: 1540
And only must be wail'd by Collatine.' 1850
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong;
And round about her tear-stained eye
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping;
And shapes her sorrow to the beldam's woes,
And shivered all the beauty of my glass,
And smear with dust their glittering golden towers;
And softly cried 'Awake, thou Roman dame,
And solemn night with slow sad gait descended
And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd.
And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.
And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow,
And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence:
And still on him she gazed; and gazing still,
And swear I found you where you did fulfil
And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.'
And that deep torture may be call'd a hell
And that deep vow, which Brutus made before,
And the dire thought of his committed evil
And then against my heart he sets his sword,
And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream 1825
And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts. 1290
And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
And therefore are they form'd as marble will;
And therefore now I need not fear to die.
And therefore still in night would cloister'd be.
And therein so ensconced his secret evil,
And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.
And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event
And time doth weary time with her complaining.
And time to see one that by alms doth live
And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
And to his protestation urged the rest, 1895
And to their hope they such odd action yield,
And turn'd it thus,' It cannot be, I find, 1590
And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel;
And unperceived fly with the filth away;
And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe,
And waste huge stones with little water drops. 1010
And what wrong else may be imagined
And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies.
'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part,
And who cannot abuse a body dead?
And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament.
And why not I from this compelled stain?'
And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
And with deep groans the diapason bear;
And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes 1520
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long;
And with my trespass never will dispense,
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.
Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear;
Answer'd their cries, 'my daughter' and 'my wife.'
A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city. 1605
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words,
As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,
As heaven, it seem'd, to kiss the turrets bow'd.
As if some mermaid did their ears entice,
As if with grief or travail he had fainted,
As lagging fowls before the northern blast:
Assail'd by night with circumstances strong
As shaming any eye should thee behold,
As silly-jeering idiots are with kings,
As slanderous death's-man to so base a slave?
As smoke from AEtna, that in air consumes,
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,
As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze, 1200
As through an arch the violent roaring tide
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay
As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight;
As well to hear as grant what he hath said.
As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.
'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.'
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night; 1075
At his own shadow let the thief run mad,
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid:
A thousand lamentable objects there, 1425
At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,
At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er:
At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
At last she sees a wretched image bound,
At last she smilingly with this gives o'er;
At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord 1355
At length address'd to answer his desire,
At this request, with noble disposition
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests:
Ay me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine,
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast;
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.
Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate.
Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare;
Become the public plague of many moe? 1530
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece. 1420
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, 1860
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending;
Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng
Begrimed with sweat, and smeared all with dust;
Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.
Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance?
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought
Besides, the life and feeling of her passion
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Betray'd the hours thou gavest me to repose,
Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;
Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear
Blue circles stream'd; like rainbows in the sky:
Blushing at that which is so putrified.
Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance,
Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
Brings home his lord and other company; 1635
Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side,
Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show.
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;
But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while,
But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,
But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd:
But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, 1135
But durst not ask of her audaciously
But eagles gazed upon with every eye.
'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she,
But if I live, thou livest in my defame:
But if the like the snow-white swan desire,
But kneel with me and help to bear thy part,
'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,
But, like a constant and confirmed devil,
But little stars may hide them when they list.
But long she thinks till he return again,
But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak;
But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd,
But now he throws that shallow habit by, 1865
But now that fresh fair mirror, dim and old,
But now the mindful messenger, come back,
But she, that yet her sad task hath not said, 1750
But such a face should bear a wicked mind.
'But tell me, girl, when went'--and there she stay'd
But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent 1450
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie
But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth 1090
But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.
But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife:
But with my body my poor soul's pollution?
But, wretched as he is, he strives in vain;
By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd,
By deep surmise of others' detriment; 1630
By foul enforcement might be done to me,
By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store,
By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving.'
By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased. 1885
By that her death, to do her husband wrong: 1315
By this, lamenting Philomel had ended 1130
By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak
By this short schedule Collatine may know
By this, starts Collatine as from a dream,
By whose example thou revenged mayest be. 1245
Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me 985
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep:
Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so
Circles her body in on every side, 1790
'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment,
Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die;
Comparing him to that unhappy guest
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight; 1350
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
Continuance tames the one; the other wild,
Corrupted blood some watery token shows;
'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart
'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries,
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed 1670
'Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,
'Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; 1070
Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,
Devise extremes beyond extremity, 1020
Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.
Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.
'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, 1025
Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.' 1710
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?
Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye;
Each present lord began to promise aid,
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:
Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse.
Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast
Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw,
Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet
Even so this pattern of the worn-out age
Extremity still urgeth such extremes.
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say 'So be it:' 1260
False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust
'Few words,' quoth she, 'Shall fit the trespass best,
First hovering o'er the paper with her quill:
'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.'
For Helen's rape the city to destroy,
For Lucrece thought he blush'd to her see shame:
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
For burden-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still,
For day hath nought to do what's done by night.'
Foretell new storms to those already spent. 1640
'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted.
For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds:
For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies.
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? 1875
For if I die, my honour lives in thee;
For in my death I murder shameful scorn: 1240
'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,
For me, I am the mistress of my fate, 1120
For me, I force not argument a straw,
For men have marble, women waxen, minds,
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy; 1160
For more it is than I can well express:
For much imaginary work was there;
For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, and groan:
For one's offence why should so many fall,
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me:
'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine,' quoth he,
For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,
For sparing justice feeds iniquity.
For sportive words and uttering foolish things:
For then eye interprets to the ear
For 'tis a meritorious fair design
For who so base would such an office have
For why her face wore sorrow's livery;
From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow
From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free. 1675
From that suspicion which the world might bear her.
From the creation to the general doom. 975
From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust:
Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, 1065
'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen:
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;
Grief best is pleased with grief's society:
Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.
Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts,
Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind,
Grossly engirt with daring infamy:
Guilty of incest, that abomination;
Guilty of perjury and subornation, 970
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift,
Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,
Had doting Priam cheque'd his son's desire,
Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue;
Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand? 1650
Have heard the cause of my untimely death;
Have time to wail th' abusing of his time. 1045
Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t' afford--
He doth again repeat, and that they swore.
He entertain'd a show so seeming just, 1565
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
He gratis comes; and thou art well appaid 965
He hath no power to ask her how she fares: 1645
Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more; 1840
Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;
Her blue blood changed to black in every vein, 1505
Her body's stain her mind untainted clears;
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.
Her cheeks with chaps and wrinkles were disguised;
Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy 1280
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeath'd
Here, all enraged, such passion her assails,
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed:
Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes:
Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds,
Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and red;
Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head,
Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw,
Her grief, but not her grief's true quality: 1365
Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe;
'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted,
Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ
Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares.
Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,
Her mansion batter'd by the enemy;
Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow, 1270
Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted,
Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly
Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute
He ten times pines that pines beholding food;
He weeps for her, for she was only mine,
He with the Romans was esteemed so
Himself himself seek every hour to kill!
Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw;
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;
His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content;
His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
His leaves will wither and his sap decay;
His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear;
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear
His time of folly and his time of sport;
Holds disputation with each thing she views,
Honour thyself to rid me of this shame:
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me:
'How may this forced stain be wiped from me?
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!
I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack!
If children predecease progenitors,
I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain,
If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see--
If in the child the father's image lies,
If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole
If tears could help, mine own would do me good.
If they surcease to be that should survive.
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,
If thou my love's desire do contradict.
I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee 1685
I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue;
Imagine every eye beholds their blame; 1395
Immaculate and spotless is my mind;
In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art 1445
In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigor roll'd;
In great commanders grace and majesty
In her the painter had anatomized
In him the painter labour'd with his skill
In me moe woes than words are now depending;
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain 1300
In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past:
In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life:
In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white,
In such relenting dew of lamentations; 1880
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born; 1810
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
Into so bright a day such black-faced storms,
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
'In vain I rail at Opportunity,
In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite:
'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain 1095
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;
I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.'
Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill:
I should not live to speak another word;
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow
Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood. 1080
Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild
'It cannot be,' quoth she,'that so much guile'-- 1585
'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook,
It easeth some, though none it ever cured,
It seem'd they would debate with angry swords.
'I will not poison thee with my attaint,
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.'
Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.' 1745
Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood: 1325
Lays open all the little worms that creep;
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends: 1015
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow:
Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright;
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe:
Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave,
Let him have time against himself to rave,
Let him have time of Time's help to despair,
Let him have time to live a loathed slave, 1035
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
'Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
'Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool, 1870
Let sin, alone committed, light alone
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny. 1780
Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still,
Like bright things stain'd, a kind of heavy fear.
Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.
Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling: 1285
Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss,
'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd.
'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,
Losing her woes in shows of discontent.
'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid,
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody:
Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair: 1180
Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.
Making such sober action with his hand,
Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear,
Many she sees where cares have carved some,
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, 1755
Met far from home, wondering each other's chance.
'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound;
'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night,
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping:
More feeling-painful: let it then suffice 1730
Much like a press of people at a door,
My Collatine would else have come to me
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;
'My body or my soul, which was the dearer,
'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd 1855
My fame and thy perpetual infamy.'
'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break
'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife 1235
My life's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it.
My low-declined honour to advance?
My resolution, husband, do thou take;
My resolution, love, shall be thy boast,
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; 1175
My sable ground of sin I will not paint, 1125
Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,
Myself was stirring ere the break of day,
My shame be his that did my fame confound;
My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born.
My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say
My soul and body to the skies and ground; 1250
My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath,
My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,
My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.'
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh
No cause, but company, of her drops spilling:
No man inveigh against the wither'd flower, 1305
No more than wax shall be accounted evil
'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living, 1765
No object but her passion's strength renews;
Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.
Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses;
No rightful plea might plead for justice there: 1700
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state:
'Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe.
Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.
Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour,
'Now, by the Capitol that we adore,
Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.
'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,
Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.
Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears.
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
Of physiognomy might one behold!
Of present death, and shame that might ensue
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, 1575
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn,
Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy:
Of spirit, Life, and bold audacity.
Of that black blood a watery rigol goes,
Of that polluted prison where it breathed:
Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky,
Of what she was no semblance did remain:
O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild;
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; 1545
One justly weeps; the other takes in hand
One poor retiring minute in an age
Only to flatter fools and make them bold: 1610
On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,
Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, 1555
'O, peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told,
'O,' quoth Lucretius,' I did give that life
Or at the least this refuge let me find; 1705
Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms. 1570
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
Or one encompass'd with a winding maze,
Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.
'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse!
'O, that is gone for which I sought to live,
O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,
'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,
'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools!
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste,
Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces;
Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.
Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage.
Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so
'Poor broken glass, I often did behold
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day:
'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree?
Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away,
'Poor instrument,' quoth she,'without a sound, 1515
Poor women's faces are their own fault's books.
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd
Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely:
Receives the scroll without or yea or no,
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.
Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.'
Revealing day through every cranny spies,
Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;
Replies her husband: 'do not take away
Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,
Sad souls are slain in merry company;
Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused; 1580
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her: 1370
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger
'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.
Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.
She dares not thereof make discovery,
Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife:
Show'd deep regard and smiling government.
'Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
She would request to know your heaviness.' 1335
Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead.
She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.
She throws her eyes about the painting round, 1550
She would have said 'can lurk in such a look;'
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
She modestly prepares to let them know
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, 1615
She thought he blush'd, as knowing Tarquin's lust,
She throws forth Tarquin's name; 'He, he,' she says,
She utters this, 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he,
Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining:
Shows me a bare-boned death by time out-worn:
Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced,
Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.'
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear,
Some dark deep desert, seated from the way, 1195
Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd,
Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords.
So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away. 1220
So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred;
So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
So should my shame still rest upon record,
So with herself is she in mutiny,
Speaking to those that came with Collatine, 1740
Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed,
Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew;
Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds:
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.
Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion. 1210
That I no more can see what once I was! 1815
That blow did that it from the deep unrest
That cannot tread the way out readily;
That guides this hand to give this wound to me.'
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, 1230
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,
'That life was mine which thou hast here deprived.
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes;
That no man could distinguish what he said.
That they will suffer these abominations,
That thou art doting father of his fruit. 1115
That was not forced; that never was inclined
That wounds my body so dishonoured.
The Romans plausibly did give consent 1905
The deep vexation of his inward soul 1830
The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece' life,
The face, that map which deep impression bears
The father says 'She's mine.' 'O, mine she is,'
The grief away that stops his answer so: 1715
The lechers in their deed: this act will be
The little birds that tune their morning's joy
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill
The murderous knife, and, as it left the place,
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow;
Then let it not be call'd impiety, 1225
Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see
Then son and father weep with equal strife
The old bees die, the young possess their hive: 1820
The one doth call her his, the other his,
The one will live, the other being dead:
The poison'd fountain clears itself again;
The protestation stops. 'O, speak, ' quoth she,
They that lose half with greater patience bear it
The stained taste of violated troth; 1110
The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow,
Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me 1735
This Plot of death when sadly she had laid,
These means, as frets upon an instrument,
They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee,
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence;
This bastard graff shall never come to growth:
'This brief abridgement of my will I make:
This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,
'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;
Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.'
Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse,
Thou nursest all and murder'st all that are: 980
Thou wast not to this end from me derived.
'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth be, 'arise:
Through which I may convey this troubled soul.
Thus cavils she with every thing she sees:
Thy father die, and not thy father thee!
Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
Till Lucrece' father, that beholds her bleed,
Till after many accents and delays, 1770
Till life to death acquit my forced offence.
'Time's glory is to calm contending kings, 990
'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life;
Till manly shame bids him possess his breath
Time's office is to fine the hate of foes;
'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore; 1165
To Tarquin's everlasting banishment.
To accessary yieldings, but still pure
To all sins past, and all that are to come,
To blot old books and alter their contents,
To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!
To chase injustice with revengeful arms:
To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,
To cheque the tears in Collatinus' eyes.
To clear this spot by death, at least I give
To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds:
To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.
To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs,
To eat up errors by opinion bred,
To endless date of never-ending woes?
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,
To flatter thee with an infringed oath;
Since that my case is past the help of law.
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame, 1085
So, I commend me from our house in grief: 1360
So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell
So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter,
So am I now: O no, that cannot be; 1100
So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill:
Some happy mean to end a hapless life.
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice;
Some present speed to come and visit me.
So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes.
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, 1415
Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems:
Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes,
Stone him with harden'd hearts harder than stones;
Stood for the whole to be imagined.
Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
Such danger to resistance did belong,
'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell;
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
Such sweet observance in this work was had,
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill; 1050
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?
Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill!
That blushing red no guilty instance gave,
That dying fear through all her body spread;
That for Achilles' image stood his spear, 1475
That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.'
That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight: 1455
That jealousy itself could not mistrust
That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate;
That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.
That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.
That patience is quite beaten from her breast.
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent:
That she concludes the picture was belied.
That she her plaints a little while doth stay,
That she with painted images hath spent;
That through their light joy seemed to appear, 1485
That two red fires in both their faces blazed; 1405
To hide the truth of this false night's abuses:
To imitate thee well, against my heart
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,
'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack, what were it,
To live or die which of the twain were better, 1205
To make the child a man, the man a child, 1005
To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled,
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, 1000
To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,
To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours, 995
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,
'To show the beldam daughters of her daughter,
To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,
To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To tame the unicorn and lion wild,
To those that live, and think no shame of me. 1255
To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow
To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light,
To wake the morn and sentinel the night,
To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes,
To wrong the wronger till he render right,
True grief is fond and testy as a child, 1145
True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed
'Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,
Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid, 1835
We are their offspring, and they none of ours.
'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know
We will revenge the death of this true wife.'
What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.
'What is the quality of mine offence,
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee.
That with my nails her beauty I may tear.
The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.'
The credulous old Priam after slew;
'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire, 1060
The heavy motion that it doth behold,
The homely villain court'sies to her low; 1390
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing;
Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing 1055
'The baser is he, coming from a king,
The face of either cipher'd either's heart;
Their face their manners most expressly told:
The moon being clouded presently is miss'd,
The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
The more she thought he spied in her some blemish. 1410
'The more to blame my sluggard negligence: 1330
'Then be this all the task it hath to say
Then call them not the authors of their ill, 1295
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:
The painter was no god to lend her those;
The repetition cannot make it less;
The scalps of many, almost hid behind,
The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.
The post attends, and she delivers it, 1385
The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,
The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife;
The remedy indeed to do me good
There might you see the labouring pioner
There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,
These contraries such unity do hold,
These water-galls in her dim element
The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust, 1435
The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds
The weary time she cannot entertain,
They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks.
The stain upon his silver down will stay.
The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew
Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky.
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill:
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear: 1525
This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth,
Those round clear pearls of his, that move thy pity,
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps, 1625
Threatening cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;
Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire, 1655
This picture she advisedly perused,
'Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity,
Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
Throng her inventions, which shall go before.
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep:
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here;
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur
Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, 1620
Till after a deep groan--'Tarquin from hence?'
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,
Time's ruin, beauty's wreck, and grim care's reign:
'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear: 1380
To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran,
To break upon the galled shore, and than
To find a face where all distress is stell'd. 1495
To find some desperate instrument of death:
To give her so much grief and not a tongue.
To hide deceit, and give the harmless show
To jump up higher seem'd, to mock the mind. 1465
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night:
To make him moan; but pity not his moans:
To make more vent for passage of her breath;
To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled 1595
To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow;
To plague a private sin in general? 1535
To see sad sights moves more than hear them told;
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;
To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds! 1600
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate:
To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter
To talk in deeds, while others saucily 1400
To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining: 1320
To think their dolour others have endured.
To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,
To trembling clients be you mediators:
Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.'
Unless thou couldst return to make amends?
Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!
Upon his head that hath transgressed so;
Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly
Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind:
What should I say? One of my husband's men
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;
'When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee,
When more is felt than one hath power to tell. 1340
When every part a part of woe doth bear.
Where no excuse can give the fault amending: 1665
Where thou was wont to rest thy weary head;
While Collatine and his consorted lords 1660
Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black:
When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect
Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil.
Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought,
Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth
When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces.
Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,
Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice; 1460
When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field,
Which the conceited painter drew so proud,
Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies. 1500
Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,
When life is shamed, and death reproach's debtor.
Who, mad that sorrow should his use control,
Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.'
Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die. 1190
While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill. 1185
Wherein deep policy did him disguise;
Who being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows; 1170
When with like semblance it is sympathized.
When they had sworn to this advised doom, 1900
Which being done with speedy diligence,
Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.
Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth, 1725
Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light,
While with a joyless smile she turns away
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, 1510
Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood
Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place:
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived? 1805
When the one pure, the other made divine? 1215
'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity,
Will slay the other and be nurse to none.
Whose love of either to myself was nearer,
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.
Will we find out; and there we will unfold
Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye;
With head declined, and voice damm'd up with woe,
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;
'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, 1275
Who, wondering at him, did his words allow:
Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees:
With this, they all at once began to say, 1760
With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across,
With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty,
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;
Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts,
With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid, 1265
Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee:
'You mocking-birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb
'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife,
With too much labour drowns for want of skill. 1150
'Yet die I will not till my Collatine
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife:
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride 1720
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay. 1845
Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain,
Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest:
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
You might behold, triumphing in their faces; 1440
'Why should the private pleasure of some one
With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,
With outward honesty, but yet defiled
Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping: 1140
Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.
With swelling ridges; and their ranks began 1490
With men's abuses: those proud lords, to blame, 1310
'With this, I did begin to start and cry; 1690
'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
With shining falchion in my chamber came
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
raining?
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense;
With sad attention long to hear her words.
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight:
Yet save that labour, for I have them here.
Why art thou thus attired in discontent?
With words, till action might become them better. 1375
A little harm done to a great good end
Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;
All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth;
'All which together, like a troubled ocean,
And as their captain, so their pride doth grow,
'And how her hand, in my hand being lock'd
And in the self-same seat sits Collatine:
And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.
And therein heartens up his servile powers,
And when his gaudy banner is display'd,
Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.'
And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,
And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.
As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth:
Away he steals with open listening ear,
Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart,
Both which, as servitors to the unjust,
Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans:
But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat,
But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
By her untimely tears, her husband's love,
By holy human law, and common troth,
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath,
By reprobate desire thus madly led,
Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;
End thy ill aim before thy shoot be ended;
Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear!
For lawful policy remains enacted.
For marks descried in men's nativity
From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get,
Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust;
He is no woodman that doth bend his bow
Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix'd,
He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;
Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix'd
Her sad behavior feeds his vulture folly,
Hindering their present fall by this dividing;
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
His venom in effect is purified.
If ever man were moved with woman moans,
In a pure compound; being so applied,
In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding,
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face;
Is almost choked by unresisted lust.
Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws,
Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth:
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended;
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee;
My heart shall never countermand mine eye:
'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me:
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage:
Myself a weakling; do not then ensnare me:
My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee:
No penetrable entrance to her plaining:
Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.
Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.
Pleads, in a wilderness where are no laws,
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;
Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality
Respect and reason, wait on wrinkled age!
Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage;
Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood.
She conjures him by high almighty Jove,
She puts the period often from his place;
And makest fair reputation but a bawd.
'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?
And with good thoughts make dispensation,
As in revenge or quittal of such strife:
Authority for sin, warrant for blame,
All pure effects, and doth so far proceed,
And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.
And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes,
And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,
And with the wind in greater fury fret:
Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,
Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.'
And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;
And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood
But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
But coward-like with trembling terror die.
But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love:
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
First red as roses that on lawn we lay,
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.
For kings like gods should govern everything.
For princes are the glass, the school, the book,
For stones dissolved to water do convert.
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band,
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
From a pure heart command thy rebel will:
From vassal actors can be wiped away;
'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire,
'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee,
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?
Hateful it is; there is no hate in loving:
'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide
He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way?
His true respect will prison false desire,
'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,
'If Collatinus dream of my intent,
If but for fear of this, thy will remove;
If in thy hope thou darest do such outrage,
I'll beg her love; but she is own:
'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee:
Melt at my tears, and be compassionate!
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear;
Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed?
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?
My will is strong, past reason's weak removing.
I sue for exiled majesty's repeal;
Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire:
Might have excuse to work upon his wife,
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier:
O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing
O, how are they wrapp'd in with infamies
O, how her fear did make her colour rise!
O, if no harder than a stone thou art,
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
'O, what excuse can my invention make,
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand,
Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.'
Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin
'Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known:
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
All this beforehand counsel comprehends:
And being lighted, by the light he spies
And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty.
And griping it, the needle his finger pricks;
And him by oath they truly honoured.
And in his will his wilful eye he tired.
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
And fright her with confusion of their cries:
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.
And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight
And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace,
And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
And with his knee the door he opens wide.
Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution.
And death's dim look in life's mortality:
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.
And sung by children in succeeding times.
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
And thou, the author of their obloquy,
Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd.
As each unwilling portal yields him way,
As if between them twain there were no strife,
As if the heavens should countenance his sin.
As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey,
As who should say 'This glove to wanton tricks
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
Between whose hills her head entombed is:
But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;
But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
But, as they open, they all rate his ill,
But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.
But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,
'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend:
But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,
But nothing can affection's course control,
But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
But she with vehement prayers urgeth still
But that life lived in death, and death in life.
But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;
But will is deaf and hears no heedful friends;
By their high treason is his heart misled;
By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade,
Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.'
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
Each one by him enforced, retires his ward;
Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
Even there he starts: quoth he, 'I must deflower:
Extinguishing his conduct in this case;
First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee:
For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.
Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells
Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing be sought.
Having solicited th' eternal power
He in the worst sense construes their denial:
Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue,
Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath;
Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
He takes for accidental things of trial;
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
His hand, that yet remains upon her breast,--
His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
How can they then assist me in the act?
Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands,
If thou deny, then force must work my way,
'I have debated, even in my soul,
I know repentant tears ensue the deed,
I know what thorns the growing rose defends;
Imagine her as one in dead of night
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.
In his clear bed might have reposed still:
Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
'I see what crosses my attempt will bring;
Is not inured; return again in haste;
I think the honey guarded with a sting;
Left there round turrets destitute and pale.
Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring,
Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies;
Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,
'Lucrece,' quoth he,'this night I must enjoy thee:
Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks:
May feel her heart-poor citizen!--distress'd,
Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight.
My will is back'd with resolution:
My will that marks thee for my earth's delight,
Night-wandering weasels shriek to see him there;
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting,
Now is he come unto the chamber-door,
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting,
O, had they in that darksome prison died!
O modest wantons! wanton modesty!
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;
Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,
On the green coverlet; whose perfect white
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.
Pain pays the income of each precious thing;
Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch:
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes:
Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;
Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes,
Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head:
Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!--
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale:
She, much amazed, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes,
Show'd like an April daisy on the grass,
Advice is sporting while infection breeds:
A martial man to be soft fancy's slave!
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Showing life's triumph in the map of death,
Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side,
A captive victor that hath lost in gain;
Against the golden splendor of the sun!
And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.
Against the unseen secrecy of night:
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.
Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,
And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar,
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,
And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd?
And decks with praises Collatine's high name,
And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot
And every one to rest themselves betake,
And for himself himself be must forsake:
And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; 865
And girdle with embracing flames the waist
And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,
And he hath won what he would lose again:
And he the burden of a guilty mind.
And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done
And in her vaulty prison stows the Day.
And in his inward mind he doth debate
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,
And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:
And leaves it to be master'd by his young;
And let thy misty vapours march so thick,
And my true eyes have never practised how
And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.
And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed,
And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,
And so, by hoping more, they have but less;
And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept.
And talk'd of virtue: O unlook'd-for evil,
And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek,
And therefore would they still in darkness be,
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly,
And undeserved reproach to him allotted 875
And useless barns the harvest of his wits; 910
And when great treasure is the meed proposed,
And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.
An expired date, cancell'd ere well begun:
Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms.
Argued by beauty's red and virtue's white
As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.
'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,
As is the morning's silver-melting dew
As life for honour in fell battle's rage;
As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving
As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage.
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.
Beauty itself doth of itself persuade
Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?
Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced;
Besides, of weariness he did complain him,
Birds never limed no secret bushes fear:
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell!
Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame!
Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,
Braving compare, disdainfully did sting
But I alone alone must sit and pine,
But beauty, in that white intituled,
But her foresight could not forestall their will.
But honest fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm,
But ill-annexed Opportunity 925
But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,
But low shrubs wither at the cedar's root.
But no perfection is so absolute,
But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store,
But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft:
But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,
But she, that never coped with stranger eyes,
But some untimely thought did instigate
But they ne'er meet with Opportunity.
But torment that it cannot cure his pain.
Can comprehend in still imagination!
Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire,
Coming from thee, I could not put him back,
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining;
Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.
Dim register and notary of shame!
Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear;
Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt,
Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,
Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold:
Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick;
Ere he can see his own abomination.
Even in the moment that we call them ours.
Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,
'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not
Far from the purpose of his coming hither,
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,
Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,
For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted:
For, after supper, long he questioned
For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be:
'For day,' quoth she, 'nights scapes doth open lay,
For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent,
For it had been dishonour to disdain him: 895
For light and lust are deadly enemies:
For now against himself he sounds this doom,
For that he colour'd with his high estate,
For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
For there it revels; and when that decays,
For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil;
For what they have not, that which they possess
Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
For with the nightly linen that she wears
From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field:
From me by strong assault it is bereft.
From the besieged Ardea all in post,
From thievish ears, because it is his own?
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd?
Grim cave of death! whispering conspirator
Haply that name of 'chaste' unhappily set
Have batter'd down her consecrated wall,
Have no perfection of my summer left,
Having no other pleasure of his gain
He faintly flies, sneaking with guilty fear;
He in his speed looks for the morning light;
He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;
He makes excuses for his being there:
He pens her piteous clamours in her head;
Here pale with fear he doth premeditate
Here she exclaims against repose and rest,
Her immortality, and made her thrall
Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express,
Her tears should drop on them perpetually.
Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled,
He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loathed delight.
He scowls and hates himself for his offence;
He stories to her ears her husband's fame,
He thence departs a heavy convertite;
Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty;
His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust,
His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those:
His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,
His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt
His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,
His taste delicious, in digestion souring,
His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms,
Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost
How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine. 870
How comes it then, vile Opportunity,
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me, 885
If all these pretty ills shall change thy good,
If that be made a theme for disputation,
In having much, torments us with defect
Immodestly lies martyr'd with disgrace!
In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.
Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee;
Intending weariness with heavy spright;
In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;
In the possession of his beauteous mate;
In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept, 890
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
Is madly toss'd between desire and dread;
Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits;
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.
Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain.
'Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
Lucretia. In that pleasant humour they posted to Rome; and
Let fair humanity abhor the deed
Let not the jealous Day behold that face
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick 830
Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case:
Little suspecteth the false worshipper;
Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,
Lucius Tarquinius, for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus,
Lucrece at Collatium. The same night he treacherously stealeth
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,
Made glorious by his manly chivalry
'Make me not object to the tell-tale Day!
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk
Make something nothing by augmenting it.
Make war against proportion'd course of time; 825
May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!
May set at noon and make perpetual night. 835
Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,
More than his eyes were open'd to the light.
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,
My honour lost, and I, a drone-like bee,
Neglected all, with swift intent he goes
No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather
No comfortable star did lend his light,
No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee:
No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries;
Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies
Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight;
Now serves the season that they may surprise
Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue,--
'O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke, 850
'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great!
'O comfort-killing Night, image of hell!
O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit
Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.
Of either's colour was the other queen,
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine:
O foul dishonour to my household's grave!
Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown
Of that we have: so then we do neglect
O happiness enjoy'd but of a few!
'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night!
O impious act, including all foul harms!
O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold,
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd?
Or, gaining more, the profit of excess
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? 900
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb
Or kills his life or else his quality.
Or kings be breakers of their own behests?
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Or why is Collatine the publisher
'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!
O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!
O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar!
'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace!
Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;
Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate,
Save something too much wonder of his eye,
Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,
Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.
Proving from world's minority their right:
Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
Rather than triumph in so false a foe.
Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face, 880
She prays she never may behold the day,
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
Sextus Tarquinius, the king's son, in their discourses after
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake.
She bears the load of lust he left behind,
She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear;
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;
She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;
She there remains a hopeless castaway;
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.
She says, her subjects with foul insurrection
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,
She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks;
Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand
So Lucrece must I force to my desire.'
So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer
Some purer chest to close so pure a mind.
So should I have co-partners in my pain; 840
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night:
So that in venturing ill we leave to be
'So then he hath it when he cannot use it,
Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
Suggested this proud issue of a king;
Tarquinius being inflamed with Lucrece' beauty, yet smothering
Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted
Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
That all the faults which in thy reign are made 855
That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more.
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;
That golden hap which their superiors want.
That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light
That is as clear from this attaint of mine
That kings might be espoused to more fame,
That nothing in him seem'd inordinate,
That oft they interchange each other's seat.
That one for all, or all for one we gage;
That some impurity doth not pollute. 905
That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.
That through the length of times he stands disgraced:
The Rape of Lucrece
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;
'The aged man that coffers-up his gold
The aim of all is but to nurse the life
The branches of another root are rotted,
The coward captive vanquished doth yield
The death of all, and all together lost.
The eyes of men without an orator;
The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace,
The guilty rebel for remission prays.
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow: 860
Their father was too weak, and they too strong,
Their silent war of lilies and of roses,
Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield;
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
The light will show, character'd in my brow,
The niggard prodigal that praised her so,--
'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story,
Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red,
Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?
The orator, to deck his oratory,
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;
'The patient dies while the physician sleeps; 955
The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
The prey wherein by nature they delight;
Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe
The same disgrace which they themselves behold;
The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;
The silly lambs: pure thoughts are dead and still,
The silver-shining queen he would distain;
The sovereignty of either being so great,
The spots whereof could weeping purify,
The story of sweet chastity's decay,
The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining;
The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours
The things we are for that which we expect;
The thing we have; and, all for want of wit,
The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries;
They scatter and unloose it from their bond,
'They think not but that every eye can see
This bateless edge on his keen appetite;
This earthly saint, adored by this devil,
This forced league doth force a further strife;
This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen,
Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm;
Those that much covet are with gain so fond,
This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
This hot desire converts to cold disdain:
This momentary joy breeds months of pain;
Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd; 935
Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd!
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds:
'Thou makest the vestal violate her oath;
Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud:
Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
Thou smother'st honesty, thou murder'st troth;
Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm;
Though death be adjunct, there's no death supposed.
Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining:
Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get;
Through Night's black bosom should not peep again:
Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old!
Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.
Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief! 940
Thy private feasting to a public fast,
'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,
Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste:
Thy violent vanities can never last. 945
Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear,
'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason;
To cloak offences with a cunning brow.
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
To have their unseen sin remain untold;
Till like a jade Self-will himself doth tire.
Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd
'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason:
To ask the spotted princess how she fares.
To cipher what is writ in learned books,
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.
To living death and pain perpetual:
To mask their brows and hide their infamy; 845
To praise the clear unmatched red and white
To quench the coal which in his liver glows.
To set forth that which is so singular?
To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?
To those two armies that would let him go,
To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state;
'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring; 920
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;
Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.'
Upon the world dim darkness doth display,
Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame!
Virtue would stain that o'er with silver white.
We have no good that we can say is ours,
Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame,
'Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child,
What needeth then apologies be made,
What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
What virtue breeds iniquity devours:
When Collatine unwisely did not let
When at Collatium this false lord arrived,
When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes:
When he himself himself confounds, betrays
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white.
When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame;
When virtue is profaned in such a devil!
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd,
Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties,
'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend,
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? 950
'Where now I have no one to blush with me,
Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field,
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show:
Which, having all, all could not satisfy;
Which in her prescience she controlled still,
Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire
Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye;
Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!
Which of them both should underprop her fame:
Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight,
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
Which virtue gave the golden age to gild
While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation
While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.
Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season; 930
Who in their pride do presently abuse it: 915
Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd:
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;
'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame;
Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.
Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory:
With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
Within whose face beauty and virtue strived
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:
With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.
'With rotten damps ravish the morning air;
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;
Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages, 960
Writ in the glassy margents of such books:
Yea the illiterate, that know not how
'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack;
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,
Yet for thy honour did I entertain him;
and finding Lucrece attired in mourning habit, demanded the cause
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;
accompanied with Junius Brutus, the other with Publius Valerius;
after he had caused his own father-in-law Servius Tullius to be
So cross him with their opposite persuasion,
So from himself impiety hath wrought,
Soft pity enters at an iron gate.
So his unhallow'd haste her words delays,
'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time,
So under his insulting falchion lies
acclamation the Tarquins were all exiled, and the state
and other noblemen of Rome, to besiege Ardea. During which siege
another to the camp for Collatine. They came, the one
bitter invective against the tyranny of the king: wherewith the
camp; from whence he shortly after privily withdrew himself, and
cruelly murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs,
government changed from kings to consuls.
hastily dispatcheth messengers, one to Rome for her father,
his passions for the present, departed with the rest back to the
his wife, though it were late in the night, spinning amongst her
in several disports. Whereupon the noblemen yielded Collatinus
intending, by their secret and sudden arrival, to make trial of
into her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the
maids: the other ladies were all found dancing and revelling, or
morning speedeth away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight,
not requiring or staying for the people's suffrages, had
of her sorrow. She, first taking an oath of them for her
people were so moved, that with one consent and a general
possessed himself of the kingdom, went, accompanied with his sons
revenge, revealed the actor, and whole manner of his dealing, and
supper every one commended the virtues of his own wife: among
that which every one had before avouched, only Collatinus finds
the people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a
the principal men of the army meeting one evening at the tent of
the victory, and his wife the fame. At that time Sextus
they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the
was, according to his estate, royally entertained and lodged by
whom Collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity of his wife
withal suddenly stabbed herself. Which done, with one consent
'So thy surviving husband shall remain
Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.
That eye which him beholds, as more divine,
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;
Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.
Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot
That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay,
That even for anger makes the lily pale,
That for his prey to pray he doth begin,
That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.
That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,
That now he vows a league, and now invasion.
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
That to his borrow'd bed he make retire,
That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.
The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed.
The blemish that will never be forgot;
The coward fights and will not be dismay'd.
The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him,
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;
The locks between her chamber and his will,
The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.'
'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die!
'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake,
The worst is but denial and reproving:
'This deed will make thee only loved for fear;
This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
The wind wars with his torch to make him stay,
Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.
Then white as lawn, the roses took away.
Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?'
The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted
The scornful mark of every open eye;
The shame that from them no device can take,
They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.
The threshold grates the door to have him heard;
Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name.
Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same,
Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king;
Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries;
Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me.
Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.'
Through little vents and crannies of the place
'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:
Thus, graceless, holds he disputation
Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face,
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,
Thy issue blurr'd with nameless bastardy:
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine,
Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me:
Till every minute pays the hour his debt.
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;
'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state'--
That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting:
That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,
That it will live engraven in my face.
That my posterity, shamed with the note
That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed.
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.'
The Argument
The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution;
The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot,
The curtains being close, about he walks,
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch:
The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;
Their own transgressions partially they smother:
The lesser thing should not the greater hide;
Then Collatine again, by Lucrece' side,
'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!
Then had they seen the period of their ill;
Then looking scornfully, he doth despise
Then my digression is so vile, so base,
The petty streams that pay a daily debt
The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred;
The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.
The sight which makes supposed terror true.
They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
This dying virtue, this surviving shame,
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch,
'Think but how vile a spectacle it were,
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
This siege that hath engirt his marriage,
Thou black'st reproach against long-living laud,
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried;
'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king;
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride:
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave:
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfil,
Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed,
Till they might open to adorn the day.
To be thy partner in this shameful doom.'
To make the breach and enter this sweet city.
To privilege dishonour in thy name?
To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste
'To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal,
To be admired of lewd unhallow'd eyes.
To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.
To cipher me how fondly I did dote;
To darken her whose light excelleth thine:
To view thy present trespass in another.
To wink, being blinded with a greater light:
To wish that I their father had not bin.
True valour still a true respect should have;
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins:
Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
What could he see but mightily he noted?
What did he note but strongly he desired?
What following sorrow may on this arise:
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
What terror or 'tis! but she, in worser taking,
'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?
When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul sin may say,
When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?
Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies,
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Whether it is that she reflects so bright,
Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon
Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week?
Who, like a foul ursurper, went about
Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking;
Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake,
Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern
Without the bed her other fair hand was,
Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears,
Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate,
With more than admiration he admired
With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night.
With your uncleanness that which is divine;
'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive,
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
To all the host of heaven I complain me,
To soften it with their continual motion;
Under that colour am I come to scale
To kill thine honour with thy life's decay;
To strike a poor unseasonable doe.
'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,
Until her husband's welfare she did hear;
Under what colour he commits this ill.
To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,
To sound a parley to his heartless foe;
Unto a view so false will not incline;
Urging the worser sense for vantage still;
What darest thou not when once thou art a king?
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;
When they in thee the like offences prove:
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring!
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer,
Where her beloved Collatinus lies.
Where subjects' eyes do learn, do read, do look.
Where thou with patience must my will abide;
Which I to conquer sought with all my might;
Which blows these pitchy vapours from their bidding,
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard:
Which he by dumb demeanor seeks to show;
Which in a moment doth confound and kill
Which, like a falcon towering in the skies,
Which once corrupted takes the worser part;
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd,
Which to her oratory adds more grace.
Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth:
While she, the picture of pure piety,
Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw
Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show,
Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies:
Who with a lingering slay his course doth let,
'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
With such black payment as thou hast pretended;
Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally,
With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells.
Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour's blot:
Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy.'
